Rome

Page 258

Mediterranean Society:
The Roman Phase

ben06937.Ch11_258-285.qxd

8/27/07

8:16 AM

Page 259

From Kingdom to Republic
The Etruscans and Rome
The Roman Republic and Its Constitution
The Expansion of the Republic

Economy and Society in
the Roman Mediterranean
Trade and Urbanization
Family and Society in Roman Times

From Republic to Empire

The Cosmopolitan Mediterranean

Imperial Expansion and Domestic Problems
The Foundation of Empire
Continuing Expansion and Integration of the Empire

Greek Philosophy and Religions of Salvation
Judaism and Early Christianity

About 55 C.E. Roman guards transported a prisoner named Paul of Tarsus from the port of
Caesarea in Palestine to the city of Rome. The journey turned out to be more eventful than
the travelers had planned. The party boarded a sailing ship loaded with grain and carrying
276 passengers as well. The ship departed in the fall—after the main sailing season, which
ran from May through September—and soon encountered a violent storm. For two frightening weeks crew and passengers alike worked furiously to keep the ship afloat, jettisoning
baggage, tackle, and cargo to lighten the load as wind and rain battered the vessel. Eventually, the ship ran aground on the island of Malta, where storm-driven waves destroyed the
craft. Yet most of the passengers and crew survived, including Paul and his guards, who spent
three months on Malta before catching another ship to Rome.
Paul had become embroiled in a dispute between Jews and early proponents of the fledgling Christian religion. Christianity first emerged as a sect of Judaism accepted by only a small
number of individuals who regarded Jesus of Nazareth as a savior for the Jewish community.
By the mid-first century C.E., Christianity was attracting numerous converts throughout the
Mediterranean basin. Paul himself was a devout Jew from Anatolia who accepted Christian
teachings and became a zealous missionary seeking converts from outside as well as within
the Jewish community. Indeed, he was the principal figure in the development of Christianity
from a Jewish sect to an independent religious faith. When a crowd of Paul’s enemies attacked him in Jerusalem, where he was promoting his recently adopted faith, the resulting
disturbance became so severe that authorities of the Roman imperial government intervened
to restore order. Under normal circumstances Roman authorities would deliver an individual
like Paul to the leaders of his ethnic community, and the laws and customs of that community would determine the person’s fate.
Paul’s case, however, was different. Knowing that Jewish leaders would condemn him
and probably execute him, Paul asserted his rights as a Roman citizen. Although he had never
traveled west of Greece, Paul had inherited Roman citizenship from his father. As a result, he
had the right to appeal his case to Rome, and he did so. His appeal did not succeed. No record
of his case survives, but tradition holds that imperial authorities executed him out of concern
that Christianity threatened the peace and stability of the Roman state.
Paul’s experience reflects the cosmopolitan character of the early Roman empire, which by
the first century C.E. dominated the entire Mediterranean basin. Roman administrators oversaw
affairs from Anatolia and Palestine in the east to Spain and Morocco in the west. Roman military forces maintained order in an empire with scores of different and sometimes conflicting

OPPOSITE:

A marble relief sculpture of about 100 C.E. depicts a crew of men working
in a treadmill that powers a crane used in construction of a Roman temple.

259

ben06937.Ch11_258-285.qxd

260

PART II |

8/27/07

8:16 AM

Page 260

The Formation of Classical Societies, 500 B.C.E. to 500 C.E.
ethnic and religious groups. Like many others, Paul of Tarsus traveled freely through much of
the Roman empire in an effort to attract converts to Christianity. Indeed, except for the integration of the Mediterranean basin by the Roman empire, Paul’s message and his faith might never
have expanded beyond the small community of early Christians in Jerusalem.
Like the Phoenicians and Greeks before them, the Romans established close links between
the various Mediterranean regions. As they conquered new lands, pacified them, and brought
them into their empire, the Romans enabled merchants, missionaries, and others to travel
readily throughout the Mediterranean basin. The Romans differed from their Phoenician and
Greek predecessors, however, by building an extensive land empire and centralizing the administration of their realm. At its high point the Roman empire dominated the entire Mediterranean basin and parts of southwest Asia, including Anatolia, Mesopotamia, Syria, Egypt, and
north Africa, besides much of continental Europe, and even parts of Britain.
The Roman empire also served as a forum for the communication of philosophical ideas
and religious beliefs. Educated elites often embraced sophisticated Hellenistic philosophies,
particularly Stoicism, which found adherents throughout the Roman empire. The larger population took comfort in popular religious beliefs, many of which promised personal salvation to
devout followers. Over the long term, Christianity was the most successful of the popular religions of salvation. The early Christians encountered harsh opposition and persecution from
Roman officials. Yet the new faith took advantage of the Romans’ well-organized imperial
holdings and spread rapidly throughout the Mediterranean basin and beyond. Eventually,
Christianity became the official religion of the Roman empire, and imperial sponsorship enabled Christianity to spread more effectively than before.

From Kingdom To Republic
Founded in the eighth century B.C.E., the city of Rome was originally a small city-state
ruled by a single king. Late in the sixth century B.C.E., the city’s aristocrats deposed the
king, ended the monarchy, and instituted a republic—a form of government in which
delegates represented the interests of various constituencies. The Roman republic survived for more than five hundred years, and it was under the republican constitution
that Rome established itself as the dominant power in the Mediterranean basin.

The Etruscans and Rome
Romulus and Remus

The city of Rome arose from origins both obscure and humble. According to the ancient legends, the city owed its existence to the flight of Aeneas, a refugee from Troy
who migrated to Italy when Greek invaders destroyed his native land. Two of his descendants, the twins Romulus and Remus, almost did not survive infancy because an
evil uncle abandoned them by the flooded Tiber River, fully expecting them to drown
or die of exposure. But a kindly she-wolf found them and nursed them to health. The
boys grew strong and courageous, and in 753 B.C.E. Romulus founded the city of
Rome and established himself as its first king.
Modern scholars do not tell so colorful a tale, but they agree that Rome grew
from humble beginnings. Beginning about 2000 B.C.E., bands of Indo-European migrants crossed the Alps and settled throughout the Italian peninsula. Like their distant
cousins in India, Greece, and northern Europe, these migrants blended with the neolithic inhabitants of the region, adopted agriculture, and established tribal federations.
Sheepherders and small farmers occupied much of the Italian peninsula, including the

ben06937.Ch11_258-285.qxd

8/27/07

8:16 AM

Page 261

CHAPTER 11 |

Mediterranean Society: The Roman Phase

Paintings in Etruscan tombs often represent scenes from daily life. Illustrations in the Tomb of
the Leopards in Tarquinia depict musicians playing pipes and lyre during a banquet.

future site of Rome itself. Bronze metallurgy appeared about 1800 B.C.E. and iron
about 900 B.C.E.
During the middle centuries of the first millennium B.C.E., Italy underwent rapid
political and economic development. The agents of that development were the Etruscans, a dynamic people who dominated much of Italy between the eighth and fifth
centuries B.C.E. The Etruscans probably migrated to Italy from Anatolia. They settled
first in Tuscany, the region around modern Florence, but they soon controlled much
of the territory from the Po River valley in northern Italy to the region around modern Naples in the south. They built thriving cities and established political and economic alliances between their settlements. They manufactured high-quality bronze
and iron goods, and they worked gold and silver into jewelry. They built a fleet and
traded actively in the western Mediterranean. During the late sixth century B.C.E.,
however, the Etruscans encountered a series of challenges from other peoples, and
their society began to decline. Greek fleets defeated the Etruscans at sea while Celtic
peoples attacked them from Gaul (modern France).
The Etruscans deeply influenced the early development of Rome. Like the Etruscan cities, Rome was a monarchy during the early days after its foundation, and several
Roman kings were Etruscans. The kings ruled Rome through the seventh and sixth
centuries B.C.E., and they provided the city with paved streets, public buildings, defensive walls, and large temples.
Etruscan merchants drew a large volume of traffic to Rome, thanks partly to the
city’s geographical advantages. Rome enjoyed easy access to the Mediterranean by way

The Etruscans

The Kingdom
of Rome

261

ben06937.Ch11_258-285.qxd

262

PART II |

8/27/07

8:16 AM

Page 262

The Formation of Classical Societies, 500 B.C.E. to 500 C.E.

Ruins of the Roman forum, where political leaders conducted public affairs
during the era of the republic, still stand today.

of the Tiber River, but since it was not on the coast, it did not run the risk of invasion
or attack from the sea. Already during the period of Etruscan dominance, trade routes
from all parts of Italy converged on Rome. When Etruscan society declined, Rome was
in a strong position to play a more prominent role both in Italy and in the larger
Mediterranean world.

The Roman Republic and Its Constitution
Establishment
of the Republic

Conflicts between
Patricians and
Plebeians

In 509 B.C.E. the Roman nobility deposed the last Etruscan king and replaced the
monarchy with an aristocratic republic. At the heart of the city, they built the Roman
forum, a political and civic center filled with temples and public buildings where
leading citizens tended to government business. They also instituted a republican
constitution that entrusted executive responsibilities to two consuls who wielded
civil and military power. Consuls were elected by an assembly dominated by hereditary aristocrats and wealthy classes, known in Rome as the patricians, and they served
one-year terms. The powerful Senate, whose members were mostly aristocrats with
extensive political experience, advised the consuls and ratified all major decisions. Because the consuls and the Senate both represented the interests of the patricians,
there was constant tension between the wealthy classes and the common people,
known as the plebeians.
During the early fifth century B.C.E., relations between the classes became so
strained that the plebeians threatened to secede from Rome and establish a rival settlement. To maintain the integrity of the Roman state, the patricians granted plebeians
the right to elect officials, known as tribunes, who represented their interests in the
Roman government. Originally plebeians chose two tribunes, but the number eventually rose to ten. Tribunes had the power to intervene in all political matters, and
they possessed the right to veto measures that they judged unfair.
Although the tribunes provided a voice in government for the plebeians, the patricians continued to dominate Rome. Tensions between the classes persisted for as long
as the republic survived. During the fourth century B.C.E., plebeians became eligible

ben06937.Ch11_258-285.qxd

8/27/07

8:16 AM

Page 263

CHAPTER 11 |

ATL ANT I C
OCE AN

NE

Po

Rome

0
0

AIN

M

AC

ED

ON
A N AT O L I A

Aegean
Sea

Athens

IA

L

NT

a

N

AT

AS

U
MO

Se

Neapolis
(Naples)

SARDINIA

Carthage

ic

k Sea

IO

BALEARIC
ISLANDS

at

i

CORSICA

Blac

dr

Massalia

A

ES

263

L P S

A

Tiber

IBERIA

RE

R hon e

PY

GAUL

Mediterranean Society: The Roman Phase

SICILY

S
RHODES

AFRICA
Me
500 mi

250
500

dite

CYPRUS

CRETE

rrane

an Sea

Roman territory, 146 B.C.E.

1000 km

Map 11.1 Expansion of the Roman republic to 146 B.C.E. By the mid-second century B.C.E., the Roman republic controlled extensive territories
outside Italy. Consider the ways Roman expansion encouraged interactions and exchanges throughout the Mediterranean region.

to hold almost all state offices and gained the right to have one of the consuls come
from their ranks. By the early third century, plebeian-dominated assemblies won the
power to make decisions binding on all of Rome. Thus, like fifth-century Athens, republican Rome gradually broadened the base of political participation.
Constitutional compromises eased class tensions, but they did not solve all political problems confronted by the republic. When faced with civil or military crises, the
Romans appointed an official, known as a dictator, who wielded absolute power for a
term of six months. By providing for strong leadership during times of extraordinary
difficulty, the republican constitution enabled Rome to maintain a reasonably stable
society throughout most of the republic’s history. Meanwhile, by allowing various
constituencies a voice in government, the constitution also helped to prevent the
emergence of crippling class tensions.

The Expansion of the Republic
While the Romans dealt constructively with internal problems, external challenges
mounted. During the fifth century B.C.E., for example, Rome faced threats not only
from peoples living in the neighboring hills but also from the Etruscans. Beyond Italy
were the Gauls, a powerful Celtic people who on several occasions invaded Italy. Between the fourth and second centuries B.C.E., however, a remarkable expansion of
power and influence transformed Rome from a small and vulnerable city-state to the
center of an enormous empire.
First the Romans consolidated their position in central Italy. During the fifth and
early fourth centuries B.C.E., the Romans founded a large regional state in central
Italy at the expense of the declining Etruscans and other neighboring peoples. Their
conquests gave them access to the iron industry built by the Etruscans and greatly
expanded the amount of land under Roman control.
During the later fourth century, the Romans built on their early conquests and
emerged as the predominant power in the Italian peninsula. The Romans secured
control of the peninsula partly because they established military colonies in regions

ben06937.Ch11_258-285.qxd

264

PART II |

Expansion in the
Mediterranean

The Punic Wars

8/27/07

8:16 AM

Page 264

The Formation of Classical Societies, 500 B.C.E. to 500 C.E.

they overcame and partly because of a generous policy toward the peoples they conquered. Instead of ruling them as vanquished subjects, the Romans often exempted
them from taxation and allowed them to govern their internal affairs. Conquered peoples in Italy enjoyed the right to trade in Rome and take Roman spouses. Some gained
Roman citizenship and rose to high positions in Roman society. The Romans forbade
conquered peoples from making military or political alliances, except with Rome, and
required them to provide soldiers and military support. Those policies provided the
political, military, and diplomatic support Rome needed to put down occasional rebellions and to dominate affairs throughout the Italian peninsula.
With Italy under its control, Rome began to play a major role in the affairs of the
larger Mediterranean basin and to experience conflicts with other Mediterranean powers. The principal power in the western Mediterranean during the fourth and third
centuries B.C.E. was the city-state of Carthage, located near modern Tunis. Originally
established as a Phoenician colony, Carthage enjoyed a strategic location that enabled
it to trade actively throughout the Mediterranean. From the wealth generated by that
commerce, Carthage became the dominant political power in north Africa (excluding
Egypt), the southern part of the Iberian peninsula, and the western region of grainrich Sicily as well. Meanwhile, the three Hellenistic empires that succeeded Alexander
of Macedon continued to dominate the eastern Mediterranean: the Antigonids ruled
Macedon, the Ptolemies ruled Egypt, and the Seleucids included wealthy Syria and
Anatolia among their many possessions. The prosperity of the Hellenistic realms supported a thriving network of maritime commerce in the eastern Mediterranean, and as
in the case of Carthage, commercial wealth enabled rulers to maintain powerful states
and armies.
The Romans clashed first with Carthage. Between 264 and 146 B.C.E., they fought
three devastating conflicts known as the Punic Wars with the Carthaginians. Friction
first arose from economic competition, particularly over Sicily, the most important
source of grain in the western Mediterranean. Later on, Romans and Carthaginians
struggled for supremacy in the region. The rivalry ended after Roman forces subjected Carthage to a long siege, conquered the city, burned much of it to the ground,
and forced some fifty thousand survivors into slavery. The Romans then annexed Carthaginian possessions in north Africa and Iberia—rich in grain, oil, wine, silver, and
gold—and used those resources to finance continued imperial expansion.
Shortly after the beginning of the Carthaginian conflict, Rome became embroiled
in disputes in the eastern Mediterranean. Conflict arose partly because pirates and
ambitious local lords ignored the weakening Hellenistic rulers and threatened regional stability. On several occasions Roman leaders dispatched armies to protect the
interests of Roman citizens and merchants, and those expeditions brought them into
conflict with the Antigonids and the Seleucids. Between 215 and 148 B.C.E., Rome
fought five major wars, mostly in Macedon and Anatolia, against Antigonid and Seleucid opponents. The Romans did not immediately annex lands in the eastern
Mediterranean but, rather, entrusted them to allies in the region. Nevertheless, by
the middle of the second century B.C.E., Rome clearly ranked as the preeminent
power in the eastern as well as the western Mediterranean.

From Republic to Empire
Imperial expansion brought wealth and power to Rome, but wealth and power brought
problems as well as benefits. Unequal distribution of wealth aggravated class tensions
and gave rise to conflict over political and social policies. Meanwhile, the need to administer conquered lands efficiently strained the capacities of the republican constitu-

ben06937.Ch11_258-285.qxd

8/27/07

8:16 AM

Page 265

CHAPTER 11 |

Mediterranean Society: The Roman Phase

265

Roman expansion depended on well-equipped and highly disciplined military forces. In
this detail from Trajan’s Column, troops assume the siege formation known as the testudo
(the “tortoise”) by surrounding themselves with their shields to deflect defenders’ missiles
while approaching city walls.

tion. During the first century B.C.E. and the first century C.E., Roman civil and military
leaders gradually dismantled the republican constitution and imposed a centralized imperial form of government on the city of Rome and its empire.

Imperial Expansion and Domestic Problems
In Rome, as in classical China and Greece, patterns of land distribution caused serious political and social tensions. Conquered lands fell largely into the hands of
wealthy elites, who organized enormous plantations known as latifundia. Because
they enjoyed economies of scale and often employed slave labor, owners of latifundia
operated at lower costs than did owners of smaller holdings, who often had to mortgage their lands or sell out to their wealthier neighbors.
During the second and first centuries B.C.E., relations between the classes became
so strained that they led to violent social conflict and civil war. The chief proponents of
social reform in the Roman republic were the brothers Tiberius and Gaius Gracchus.
Just as Wang Mang, the imperial usurper of the Han dynasty, tried to bring about a redistribution of land resources in classical China, the Gracchi brothers worked to limit
the amount of conquered land that any individual could hold. Those whose lands exceeded the limit would lose some of their property, which officials would then allocate
to small farmers. Again, as in the case of Wang Mang, the Gracchi had little success because most members of the wealthy and ruling classes considered them dangerous radicals and found ways to stymie their efforts. Indeed, fearing that the brothers might
gain influence over Roman affairs, their enemies had them both assassinated—Tiberius
in 132 B.C.E. and Gaius in 121 B.C.E.
The experiences of the Gracchi brothers clearly showed that the constitution of the
Roman republic, originally designed for a small city-state, might not be suitable for a

The Gracchi Brothers

ben06937.Ch11_258-285.qxd

266

PART II |

Civil War

8/27/07

8:16 AM

Page 266

The Formation of Classical Societies, 500 B.C.E. to 500 C.E.

large and growing empire. Formal political
power remained in the hands of a small,
privileged class of people in Rome, and their
policies often reflected the interests of their
class rather than the concerns of the empire
as a whole. For the century following the assassinations of the Gracchi brothers, Roman
politicians and generals jockeyed for power
and position as they sought to mobilize support. Several military commanders began to
recruit personal armies not from the ranks
of small farmers—traditionally the core of
the Roman army—but from landless rural
residents and urban workers. Because these
troops had no economic cushion to fall back
on, they were intensely loyal to their generals and placed the interests of the army
before those of the state. Most important
of these generals were Gaius Marius, who
sided with social reformers who advocated
redistribution of land, and Lucius Cornelius
Sulla, a veteran of several foreign campaigns
who allied with the conservative and aristocratic classes.
A bust of Julius Caesar depicts a trim
During the early first century B.C.E.,
conqueror and a canny political leader.
Rome fell into civil war. In 87 B.C.E. Marius marched on Rome, placed the city
under military occupation, and hunted down his political enemies. After Marius died
the following year, Sulla made plans to take his place. In 83 B.C.E. he seized Rome and
initiated a grisly slaughter of his enemies. Sulla posted lists naming proscribed individuals whom he labeled enemies of the state, and he encouraged the Roman populace to
kill these individuals on sight and confiscate their properties. During a reign of terror
that lasted almost five years, Sulla brought about the murder or execution of some ten
thousand individuals. By the time Sulla died in 78 B.C.E., he had imposed an extremely
conservative legislative program that weakened the influence of the lower classes and
strengthened the hand of the wealthy in Roman politics.
Because Sulla’s program did not address Rome’s most serious social problems,
however, it had no chance to succeed over a long term. Latifundia continued to pressure small farmers, who increasingly left the countryside and swelled the ranks of the
urban lower classes. Poverty in the cities, especially Rome, led to periodic social eruptions when the price of grain rose or the supply fell. Meanwhile, the urban poor increasingly joined the personal armies of ambitious generals, who themselves posed
threats to social and political stability. In this chaotic context Gaius Julius Caesar inaugurated the process by which Rome replaced its republican constitution with a centralized imperial form of government.

The Foundation of Empire
A nephew of the general Marius, Julius Caesar favored liberal policies and social reform. In spite of these well-known political sympathies, he escaped danger during the

ben06937.Ch11_258-285.qxd

8/27/07

8:16 AM

Page 267

CHAPTER 11 |

Mediterranean Society: The Roman Phase

reign of Sulla and the conservatives who followed him. Caesar’s survival was due in
some measure to his youth—Sulla and his supporters simply did not consider Caesar to
be a serious threat—but partly also to a well-timed excursion to Greece and the eastern
Mediterranean. During the decade of the 60s B.C.E., Caesar played an active role in
Roman politics. He spent enormous sums of money sponsoring public spectacles—
such as battles between gladiators and wild animals—which helped him build a reputation and win election to posts in the republican government. This activity kept him in
the public eye and helped to publicize his interest in social reform. During the next
decade Caesar led a Roman army to Gaul, which he conquered and brought into the
still-growing Roman empire.
The conquest of Gaul helped to precipitate a political crisis. As a result of his military victories, Caesar had become extremely popular in Rome. Conservative leaders
sought to maneuver him out of power and regain the initiative for their own programs. Caesar refused to stand aside, and in 49 B.C.E. he turned his army toward
Rome. By early 46 B.C.E. he had made himself master of the Roman state and named
himself dictator—an office that he claimed for life rather than for the constitutional
six-month term. Caesar then centralized military and political functions and brought
them under his control. He confiscated property from conservatives and distributed it
to veterans of his armies and other supporters. He launched large-scale building projects in Rome as a way to provide employment for the urban poor. He also extended
Roman citizenship to peoples in the imperial provinces, and he even appointed Gauls
to the Roman Senate.
Caesar’s policies pointed the way toward a centralized, imperial form of government for Rome and its possessions, but the consolidation of that government had to
wait for a new generation of leaders. Caesar’s rule alienated many members of the Roman elite classes, who considered him a tyrant. In 44 B.C.E. they organized a plot to
assassinate Caesar and restore the republic. They attacked Caesar and stabbed him to
death in the Roman forum, but the restoration of an outmoded form of government
was beyond their powers. Instead, they plunged Rome into a fresh round of civil conflict that persisted for thirteen more years.
When the struggles ended, power belonged to Octavian, a nephew and protégé
of Julius Caesar and the dictator’s adopted son. In a naval battle at Actium in Greece
(31 B.C.E.), Octavian defeated his principal rival, Mark Antony, who had joined forces
with Cleopatra, last of the Ptolemaic rulers of Egypt. He then moved quickly and efficiently to consolidate his rule. In 27 B.C.E. the Senate bestowed on him the title Augustus, a term with strong religious connotations suggesting the divine or semidivine nature
of its holder. During his forty-five years of virtually unopposed rule, Augustus fashioned
an imperial government that guided Roman affairs for the next three centuries.
Augustus’s government was a monarchy disguised as a republic. Like Julius Caesar,
Augustus ruled by centralizing political and military power. Yet he proceeded more
cautiously than had his patron: Augustus preserved traditional republican offices and
forms of government and included members of the Roman elite in his government. At
the same time, though, he fundamentally altered the nature of that government. He
accumulated vast powers for himself and ultimately took responsibility for all important governmental functions. He reorganized the military system, creating a new standing army with commanders who owed allegiance directly to the emperor—a reform
that eliminated problems caused during the late republic by generals with personal
armies. He also was careful to place individuals loyal to him in all important positions.
Augustus served as emperor until his death in 14 C.E. During his long reign he stabilized a land racked by civil war and enabled the institutions of empire to take root.

Augustus

Augustus’s
Administration

267

ben06937.Ch11_258-285.qxd

268

PART II |

8/27/07

8:16 AM

Page 268

The Formation of Classical Societies, 500 B.C.E. to 500 C.E.

Continuing Expansion
and Integration
of the Empire

The Pax Romana

Roman Roads

During the two centuries following
Augustus’s rule, Roman armies conquered distant lands and integrated
them into a larger economy and society. During republican times Rome
already held Italy, Greece, Syria, Gaul,
and most of the Iberian peninsula,
with small outposts in north Africa
and Anatolia. By Augustus’s reign
imperial holdings included much of
southeastern Europe, most of north
Africa, including Egypt, and sizable
territories in Anatolia and southwest
Asia. At its high point, during the
early second century C.E., the Roman
empire embraced much of Britain as
well as a continuous belt of possessions surrounding the Mediterranean
and extending to rich agricultural reIn this statue, which emphasizes his civil and
gions inland, including Mesopotamia.
military leadership in Rome, Augustus wears
After Octavian’s conquest of Egypt
the uniform of a Roman general.
in 30 B.C.E., Roman forces even made
forays deep into the kingdom of Kush, and for more than three centuries they occupied a stretch of the Nile valley about 110 kilometers (70 miles) south of the river’s
first cataract near Aswan.
Roman expansion had especially dramatic effects in European lands embraced by
the empire. Egypt, Anatolia, Syria, and Mesopotamia had long been sites of complex
city-based societies, but Gaul, Germany, Britain, and Spain were sparsely populated
lands occupied by cultivators who lived in small villages. When Roman soldiers, diplomats, governors, and merchants began to arrive in large numbers, they stimulated the
development of local economies and states. They sought access to resources such as
tin, and they encouraged local inhabitants to cultivate wheat, olives, and grapes. Local
ruling elites allied with Roman representatives and used the wealth that came into their
communities to control natural resources and build states on a much larger scale than
ever before. Cities emerged where administrators and merchants conducted their business, and the tempo of European society noticeably quickened: Paris, Lyons, Cologne,
Mainz, London, Toledo, and Segovia all trace their origins to Roman times.
Within the boundaries of the Roman empire itself, a long era of peace facilitated
economic and political integration from the first to the middle of the third century
C.E. Augustus brought peace not only to Rome, by ending the civil disturbances that
had plagued the city for more than a century, but also to the empire. His reign inaugurated the era known as the pax romana (“Roman peace”) that persisted for two
and a half centuries. In spite of occasional flare-ups, especially among conquered peoples who resented Roman rule, the pax romana facilitated trade and communication
throughout the region from Mesopotamia to the Atlantic Ocean.
Like their Persian, Chinese, Indian, and Hellenistic counterparts, the Romans integrated their empire by building networks of transportation and communication. Since

ben06937.Ch11_258-285.qxd

8/27/07

8:16 AM

Page 269

CHAPTER 11 |

Roman empire at greatest extent

B R I TA I N

Roman roads

London
ATL AN TI C
OCEAN

GERMANIA

GAUL

Da nu b

ia

SICILY

MACE

Athens
Corinth

DO

N

Manzikert
Tigri

A N AT O L I A

n

Ephesus

SYRIA

hra

1000

2000 km

M

I
Pe
G

ian
rs lf
u

500

750 mi

TA

Alexandria
J U DAEA

le
Ni

0

500

250

PO

Babylon
Damascus
Palmyra
Jerusalem

EGYPT
0

t es

SO

A

RHODES
CYPRUS

Eup

PA R T H I A N
EMPIRE

s

ME

Tarsus

CRETE

L I B YA

ARMENIA

Byzantuim

Sea

Carthage

a

A

k Sea

Sea

SARDINIA

Blac

a

M A U R I TA N I A
AINS
UNT
MO
S
LA

Se

TI

Aege

AT

BALEARIC
ISLANDS

c

i

Gades

A

at

Rome

ri

CORSICA

LM

Massalia

S

n

R h on e

sp

o

Tiber

NE

Ca

e

DA

Lyons
Milan P

Ad

Eb Y
RE
N
P o
r

IBERIA

269

Mediterranean Society: The Roman Phase

ARABIA
Red
Sea

Berenice

Map 11.2 The Roman empire, ca. 117 C.E. Compare this map of the Roman empire at its height with Map 11.1 showing territories controlled by
the Roman republic almost two centuries earlier. How important was the Romans’ extensive road network for the maintenance of their enormous empire?

ancient times, Roman engineers have enjoyed a reputation as outstanding road builders.
Roman engineers prepared a deep bed for their roads, edged them with curbs, provided
for drainage, and then topped them off with large, flat paving stones. Their main roads
were 6 to 8 meters (20 to 26 feet) wide —large enough to accommodate two-way traffic—and even roads winding through mountains were 2 to 3 meters (6 to 10 feet) wide.
Builders placed milestones along the roads, and the imperial postal system maintained
stations for couriers. The roads and postal system permitted urgent travel and messages
to proceed with remarkable speed: Tiberius, successor of Augustus as Roman emperor,
once traveled 290 kilometers (180 miles) in a single day over Roman roads.
Roads linked all parts of the Roman empire. One notable highway of more than
2,500 kilometers (1,554 miles) stretched along the northeast imperial frontier from
the Black Sea to the North Sea, parallel to the Danube and Rhine Rivers. Another road
linked Rome to the city of Gades (modern Cadiz) in southern Spain. A road of 4,800
kilometers (2,983 miles) ran parallel to the coast of north Africa, and numerous spurs
reached south, enabling merchants and soldiers to range deep into the Sahara desert.
Romans also built new roads that facilitated travel and trade in the eastern Mediterranean region. One route linked the port of Berenice on the Red Sea to Alexandria,
and others linked the towns and ports of the eastern Mediterranean seaboard to
Palmyra, a principal way station of caravan traffic coming west from central Asia. Scholars estimate the combined length of the Roman roads was greater than 80,000 kilometers (50,000 miles).
Under conditions of political stability and the pax romana, jurists constructed an
elaborate system of law. Romans began a tradition of written law about 450 B.C.E.,

Roman Law

ben06937.Ch11_258-285.qxd

270

PART II |

8/27/07

8:16 AM

Page 270

The Formation of Classical Societies, 500 B.C.E. to 500 C.E.

Sources from the Past
Tacitus on Corruption in the Early Roman Empire
Augustus’s imperial regime and the pax romana brought peace and stability to the Roman empire, but some contemporaries thought there was a darker side to the new imperial order. Cornelius Tacitus (56–120 C.E.) was a prominent
aristocrat and the most important historian of the early Roman empire. In his Annals, written in the early second
century C.E., Tacitus did not deny the “gift of peace,” but he deplored the loss of political courage among Roman leaders
after the establishment of the imperial regime.
Famous writers have recorded Rome’s early glories and
disasters. The Augustan Age, too, had its distinguished
historians. But then the rising tide of flattery exercised a
deterrent effect. The reigns of [Augustus’s successors as
emperor] Tiberius, Gaius, Claudius, and Nero were described during their lifetimes in fictitious terms, for fear
of the consequences; whereas the accounts written after
their deaths were influenced by raging animosities. So I
have decided to say a little about Augustus, with special
attention to his last period, and then go on to the reign
of Tiberius [14–37 C.E.] and what followed. . . .
[Augustus] seduced the army with bonuses, and his
cheap food policy was successful bait for civilians. Indeed, he attracted everybody’s goodwill by the enjoyable gift of peace. Then he gradually pushed ahead and
absorbed the functions of the senate, the officials, and
even the law. Opposition did not exist. War or judicial
murder had disposed of all men of spirit. Upper-class
survivors found that slavish obedience was the way to
succeed, both politically and financially. They had profited from the revolution [the replacement of the republic by an imperial form of government], and so now they
liked the security of the existing arrangement better than
the dangerous uncertainties of the old regime. Besides,
the new order was popular in the provinces. There, government by Senate and People was looked upon skeptically as a matter of sparring dignitaries and extortionate
officials. The legal system had provided no remedy
against these, since it was wholly incapacitated by violence, favouritism, and—most of all—bribery. . . .
Nobody had any immediate worries as long as Augustus retained his physical powers, and kept himself
going, and his House, and the peace of the empire. But
when old age incapacitated him, his approaching end
brought hopes of change. A few people started idly talking of the blessings of freedom [i.e., discussing a return
to the republic]. Some, more numerous, feared civil war;
SOURCE:

others wanted it. The great majority, however, exchanged
critical gossip about candidates for the succession. . . .
Then two pieces of news became known simultaneously: Augustus was dead, and Tiberius was in control.
The new reign’s first crime was the assassination of
Agrippa Postumus [grandson of Augustus]. He was
killed by a staff-officer—who found it a hard task,
though he was a persevering murderer and the victim
[was] taken by surprise unarmed. Tiberius said nothing
about the matter in the senate. He pretended that the
orders came from Augustus, who was alleged to have
instructed the colonel in charge to kill Agrippa Postumus as soon as Augustus himself was dead. It is true
that Augustus’ scathing criticisms of the young man’s
behavior were undoubtedly what had prompted the
senate to decree his banishment. But the emperor had
never been callous enough to kill any of his relations,
and that he should murder his own grandchild to remove the worries of a stepson seemed incredible. It
would be nearer the truth to suppose that Tiberius because he was afraid, and Livia [Augustus’s widow and
mother of Tiberius by another man, but not the grandmother of Agrippa] through stepmotherly malevolence,
loathed and distrusted the young Agrippa Postumus
and got rid of him at the first opportunity. . . .
Meanwhile at Rome consuls, senate, knights, precipitately became servile. The more distinguished men
were, the greater their urgency and insincerity. They
must show neither satisfaction at the death of one emperor, nor gloom at the accession of another: so their
features were carefully arranged in a blend of tears and
smiles, mourning and flattery.
FOR FURTHER REFLECTION

How might a spokesperson from the Roman imperial
court have responded to these views of Tacitus?

Tacitus. The Annals of Imperial Rome. Rev. ed. Trans. by Michael Grant. Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1977, pp. 31–35.

ben06937.Ch11_258-285.qxd

8/27/07

8:16 AM

Page 271

CHAPTER 11 |

Mediterranean Society: The Roman Phase

Roman engineers built paved roads far from home. This road served as the main street
through the bustling city of Ephesus in Anatolia (modern-day Turkey).

when they promulgated the Twelve Tables as a basic law code for citizens of the early
republic. As armies spread Roman influence throughout the Mediterranean, jurists
worked to construct a rational body of law that would apply to all peoples under
Roman rule. During the late republic and especially during the empire, the jurists articulated standards of justice and gradually applied them throughout Roman territory.
They established the principle that defendants were innocent until proven guilty, and
they ensured that defendants had a right to challenge their accusers before a judge in
a court of law. They also permitted judges to set aside laws that were unfair. Like transportation and communication networks, Roman law helped to integrate the diverse
lands that made up the empire, and the principles of Roman law continued to shape
Mediterranean and European society long after the empire had disappeared.

Economy and Society
in the Roman Mediterranean
The rapid expansion of Roman influence and the imposition of Roman imperial rule
brought economic and social changes to peoples throughout the Mediterranean basin.
Good roads and the pax romana encouraged trade between regions. Existing cities
benefited handsomely from the wealth generated by trade, and in the lands they conquered, the Romans founded new cities to serve as links between local regions and the
larger Mediterranean economy. Meanwhile, like most other peoples of classical times,
the Romans built a strictly patriarchal society and made extensive use of slave labor.

271

ben06937.Ch11_258-285.qxd

272

PART II |

8/27/07

8:16 AM

Page 272

The Formation of Classical Societies, 500 B.C.E. to 500 C.E.

Trade and Urbanization
Commercial
Agriculture

Mediterranean Trade

The City of Rome

Like other classical societies, the Roman Mediterranean experienced economic development and social change as the state expanded and brought new regions into its
network of trade and communication. Agricultural production, the economic foundation of the Roman empire, also underwent transformation with the expansion of
empire and the growth of trade. Instead of planting crops for immediate local use,
owners of latifundia concentrated on production for export. Grain from latifundia in
north Africa, Egypt, and Sicily routinely found its way over the Roman roads and the
Mediterranean sea lanes to the large cities of the empire. The ship that Paul of Tarsus
boarded at Caesarea, for example, carried several hundred tons of wheat destined for
consumers in Rome.
Commercial agriculture played an important role in the economic specialization
and integration of the empire. Because it was possible to import grain at favorable
prices from lands that routinely produced large surpluses, other regions could concentrate on the cultivation of fruits and vegetables or on the production of manufactured
items. Greece, for example, concentrated on olives and grapevines. Syria and Palestine
produced fruits, nuts, and wool fabrics. Gaul produced grain, supplied copper, and
began to experiment with the cultivation of grapevines. Spain produced high-quality
olive oil as well as wine, horses, and most of the precious metal used in the Roman empire. Italy became a center for the production of pottery, glassware, and bronze goods.
Archaeologists have uncovered one pottery factory north of Rome that might have
employed hundreds of workers and that had a mixing vat capable of holding more than
40,000 liters (10,568 gallons) of clay.
Specialized production of agricultural commodities and manufactured goods set
the stage for vigorous trade. Sea lanes linked ports from Syria and Palestine to Spain
and north Africa. Roman military and naval power kept the seas largely free of pirates
so that sizable cargoes could move safely over long distances, barring foul weather. Indeed, the Mediterranean became essentially a Roman lake, which the Romans called
mare nostrum (“our sea”). As Roman military forces, administrators, tax collectors,
and other officials traveled throughout the empire carrying out their duties, they joined
the merchants in linking the Mediterranean’s regions into a well-integrated network of
communication and exchange. Archaeologists have discovered that even in remote
rural areas, peasants routinely used high-quality pottery, ate food off fine tableware,
consumed wines and oils imported from afar, and slept under tiled roofs.
Cities benefited handsomely from Mediterranean integration and played a prominent role in promoting economic and social change. Along with taxes, tributes, booty,
and other wealth generated by military expansion, much of the profit from Mediterranean trade flowed to Rome, where it fueled remarkable urban development. In the
first century C.E., some ten thousand statues decorated the city, along with seven hundred pools, five hundred fountains, and thirty-six monumental marble arches celebrating military victories and other achievements. The Roman state financed the construction
of temples, bathhouses, public buildings, stadiums, and perhaps most important of all,
aqueducts that brought fresh water into the city from the neighboring mountains. Construction projects benefited from the use of concrete, invented by Roman engineers
during the republican era, which strengthened structures and allowed builders to meet
high standards of precision required for plumbing and water control.
Construction provided employment for hundreds of thousands of workers. As a
result, the population of Rome surged, and the city’s economy experienced rapid
growth. Shopkeepers, artisans, merchants, and bankers proliferated in the imperial
capital. Economic development attracted large numbers of migrants from the country-

ben06937.Ch11_258-285.qxd

8/27/07

8:16 AM

Page 273

CHAPTER 11 |

Mediterranean Society: The Roman Phase

273

A wall painting from Stabiae (a small community near Pompeii destroyed by the eruption
of Vesuvius in 79 C.E.) depicts an Italian harbor with ships, wharves, warehouses, markets,
and decorative columns topped by statues.

side and from foreign lands. Most received low wages as laborers, construction workers, or servants, but those with skills sometimes found good employment as craftsmen. Some who went to Rome with a bit of money established successful businesses,
and by hard work or good fortune, a few entrepreneurs became wealthy and respected
businessmen.
Urban growth and development also took place beyond the capital. Some parts
of the empire, such as Greece and Syria, had long-standing urban traditions. There
trade and economic development brought additional prosperity. Elsewhere the Romans founded cities at strategic sites for purposes of government and administration,
especially in Spain, Gaul, and Britain, which encouraged economic and social development at the far reaches of the empire.
As wealth concentrated in the cities, urban residents came to expect a variety of
comforts not available in rural areas. Merchants traveling the roads and sea lanes
brought delicacies and luxury items from all parts of the Roman empire: Spanish hams,
oysters from British waters, fine wool cloaks from Gaul, and Syrian nuts, dates, and figs
all made their way to consumers in Rome and other prosperous cities. Roman cities
enjoyed abundant supplies of fresh water, sometimes brought from distant mountains

Roman Cities and
Their Attractions

ben06937.Ch11_258-285.qxd

274

PART II |

8/27/07

8:16 AM

Page 274

The Formation of Classical Societies, 500 B.C.E. to 500 C.E.

Many Roman aqueducts survive to the present day. This one carried water to the city
of Nemausus in Gaul (modern Nîmes in France). The water flowed through a trough
supported by the top layer of arches.

by aqueducts, and elaborate sewage and plumbing systems. All sizable cities and even
many smaller towns had public baths featuring hot and cold rooms, and often swimming pools and gymnasia as well. Underground sewers carried away wastewater.
Enormous circuses, stadiums, and amphitheaters provided sites for the entertainment of the urban masses. Circuses were oval structures with tracks for chariot races,
which were wildly popular in the Roman empire. The Circus Maximus at Rome accommodated about 250,000 spectators. Entertainment in stadiums often took forms
now considered coarse and cruel—battles to the death between gladiators or between humans and wild animals—but urban populations flocked to such events,
which they looked on as exciting diversions from daily routine. The Roman Colosseum, a magnificent marble stadium and sports arena opened in 80 C.E., provided
seating for about 50,000 spectators. The structure had a multicolored awning that
protected viewers from sun and rain, and its construction was so precise that it was
possible to flood the arena with water and stage mock naval battles within its walls.

Family and Society in Roman Times
The Paterfamilias

Roman law vested immense authority in male heads of families. The Roman family
consisted of an entire household, including slaves, free servants, and close relatives
who lived together. Usually the eldest male ruled the household as paterfamilias (“father of the family”). Roman law gave the paterfamilias the authority to arrange marriages for his children, determine the work or duties they would perform, and punish
them for offenses as he saw fit. He had rights also to sell them into slavery and even
to execute them.

ben06937.Ch11_258-285.qxd

8/27/07

8:16 AM

Page 275

CHAPTER 11 |

Mediterranean Society: The Roman Phase

From the days of the republic, residents of Rome consumed subsidized grain imported from
distant territories. In this painting from a tomb, workers load grain onto a boat at the port of
Ostia, at the mouth of the Tiber River, for transport upriver to the city of Rome.

Although legally endowed with extraordinary powers, the Roman paterfamilias
rarely ruled tyranically over his charges. In fact, women usually supervised domestic affairs in Roman households, and by the time they reached middle age, women generally
wielded considerable influence within their families. They helped select marriage partners for their offspring, and they sometimes played large roles in managing their families’ financial affairs. Although Roman law placed strict limits on the ability of women
to receive inheritances, enforcement was inconsistent, and clever individuals found
ways to evade the law or take advantage of its loopholes. During the third and second
centuries B.C.E., as Roman expansion in the Mediterranean brought wealth to the capital, women came to possess a great deal of property. By the first century B.C.E., in spite
of the authority legally vested in the paterfamilias, many women supervised the financial affairs of family businesses and wealthy estates.
Increasing wealth had important consequences for Roman society. New classes of
merchants, landowners, and construction contractors accumulated enormous private
wealth and rivaled the old nobility for prominence. The newly rich classes built palatial houses with formal gardens and threw lavish banquets with rare and exotic foods
such as boiled ostrich, parrot-tongue pie, and tree fungus served in a sauce of fish fat,
jellyfish, and eggs. While wealthy classes probed culinary frontiers, cultivators and
urban masses subsisted largely on porridge and vegetables occasionally supplemented
by eggs, fish, sausage, or meat.
By the first century B.C.E., poverty had become a considerable problem in Rome
and other large cities of the empire. Often unemployed, the urban masses sometimes
rioted to express their dissatisfaction and seek improved conditions, and they readily
provided recruits for private armies of ambitious generals such as Marius and Sulla. Imperial authorities never developed a true urban policy but, rather, sought to keep the
masses contented with “bread and circuses”—subsidized grain and spectacular public
entertainments.
Roman society made extensive use of slave labor: by the second century C.E., slaves
may have represented as much as one-third of the population of the Roman empire. In
the countryside they worked mostly on latifundia, though many labored in state quarries and mines. Rural slaves worked under extremely harsh conditions, often chained
together in teams. Discontent among rural slaves led to several large-scale revolts,

Wealth and
Social Change

Slavery

275

ben06937.Ch11_258-285.qxd

276

PART II |

8/27/07

8:16 AM

Page 276

The Formation of Classical Societies, 500 B.C.E. to 500 C.E.

A relief carving on a Roman monument depicts some slaves serving guests at a banquet (above),
while others work in the kitchen (below).

especially during the second and first centuries B.C.E. During the most serious uprising,
in 73 B.C.E., the escaped slave Spartacus assembled an army of seventy thousand rebellious slaves. The Roman army dispatched eight legions, comprising more than forty
thousand well-equipped, veteran troops, to quell the revolt.
In the cities, conditions were much less difficult than in the countryside. Female
slaves commonly worked as domestic servants while males toiled as servants, laborers, craftsmen, shopkeepers, or business agents for their owners. Slaves who had an
education or possessed some particular talent had the potential to lead comfortable
lives. The first-century Anatolian slave Epictetus even became a prominent Stoic
philosopher. He spent much of his life studying with Rome’s leading intellectuals,
and he lectured to large audiences that included high Roman officials and perhaps
even emperors.
More than their counterparts in rural areas, urban slaves could hope for manumission as a reward for a long term of loyal service: it was common, though not
mandatory, for masters to free urban slaves about the time they reached age thirty.
Until freed, however, slaves remained under the strict authority of their masters, who
had the right to sell them, arrange their family affairs, punish them, and even execute
them for serious offenses.

The Cosmopolitan Mediterranean
The integration of the Mediterranean basin had important effects not only for the
trade and economy of the Roman empire but also for its cultural and religious traditions. As travelers ventured throughout the Mediterranean basin, they became ac-

ben06937.Ch11_258-285.qxd

8/27/07

8:16 AM

Page 277

CHAPTER 11 |

Mediterranean Society: The Roman Phase

277

quainted with other cultural and religious traditions. When migrants moved to Rome
and other large cities, they often continued to observe their inherited traditions and
thus contributed to the cosmopolitan cultural atmosphere of the empire. Roads and
communication networks favored the spread of new popular religions. Most important of these over time was Christianity, which originated as a small and persecuted
Jewish sect. Within three centuries, however, Christianity had become the official religion of the Roman empire and the predominant faith of the Mediterranean basin.

Greek Philosophy and Religions of Salvation
During the early days of their history, the Romans recognized many gods and goddesses, who they believed intervened directly in human affairs. Jupiter was the principal god, lord of the heavens. Mars was the god of war, Ceres the goddess of grain,
Janus the god who watched the threshold of individual houses, and Vesta the goddess of the hearth. In addition to these major deities, most Roman households also
honored tutelary deities, gods who looked after the welfare of individual families.
As the Romans expanded their political influence and built an empire, they encountered the religious and cultural traditions of other peoples. Often they adopted
the deities of other peoples and used them for their own purposes. From the Etruscans, for example, they learned of Juno, the moon goddess, and Minerva, the goddess of wisdom, as well as certain religious practices, such as divination of the future
through examination of the internal organs of ritually sacrificed animals.
The Romans also drew inspiration from the Greek tradition of rational thought
and philosophy. When the Romans established political hegemony in the eastern Mediterranean in the third and second centuries B.C.E., the most prominent school of
thought in Hellenistic Greece was Stoicism. Recognizing that they lived in a large and
interdependent world, the Stoics sought to identify a set of universal moral standards
based on nature and reason that would transcend local ethical codes.
That approach to moral thought appealed strongly to Roman intellectuals, and
thinkers such as Marcus Tullius Cicero (106– 43 B.C.E.) readily adopted Stoic values.
Cicero studied in Greece and became thoroughly acquainted with both classical and
Hellenistic schools of thought. He was a persuasive orator, and he wrote clear, elegant,
polished Latin prose. In adapting Hellenistic thought to Roman needs, Cicero drew
heavily from the Stoics’ moral and ethical teachings. His letters and treatises emphasized the individual’s duty to live in accordance with nature and reason. He argued
that the pursuit of justice was the individual’s highest public duty, and he scorned those
who sought to accumulate wealth or to become powerful through immoral, illegal, or
unjust means. Through his speeches and especially his writings, Cicero helped to establish Stoicism as the most prominent school of moral philosophy in Rome.
While educated thinkers drew inspiration from the Greeks, the masses found comfort in religions of salvation that established their presence throughout the Mediterranean basin and beyond. Like Stoicism, these religions clearly reflected the political
and social conditions of the Hellenistic period: in an imperial era, when close-knit
city-states no longer served as a focus for individual loyalties, religions of salvation
appealed to the popular masses by providing a sense of purpose and the promise of a
glorious future existence.
These religions became prominent features of Mediterranean society during Hellenistic times and became increasingly noticeable in Rome during the late republic
as migrants settled in the capital and brought their faiths with them. Under the
Roman empire, religions of salvation flourished both in Rome and throughout the
Mediterranean basin. Merchants, soldiers, and administrators carried their cults as

Roman Deities

Greek Influence

Cicero and Stoicism

Religions of Salvation

ben06937.Ch11_258-285.qxd

278

PART II |

8/27/07

8:16 AM

Page 278

The Formation of Classical Societies, 500 B.C.E. to 500 C.E.

A wall painting of the fourth century C.E. from a Christian catacomb depicts a group
of pagan students gathered around their teacher, who presents a lesson in anatomy
with the aid of a cadaver. This scene reflects the influence of Greek scientific and
medical studies in the Roman empire.

Mithraism

Mithraism (MITH-rahiz'm)

they conducted their business, and missionaries traveled alongside them in search of
converts. The roads of the empire and the sea lanes of the Mediterranean thus served
not only as trade routes and lines of official communication but also as highways for
religions of salvation, which traveled to all the ports and large cities of the empire.
Among the most popular of these religions of salvation was the cult dedicated to
the Persian deity Mithras. In Zoroastrian mythology, Mithras was a god closely identified with the sun and light. Roman soldiers serving in the Hellenistic world, particularly Anatolia, encountered the cult of Mithras and adapted it to their interests.
They associated Mithras less with the sun than with military virtues such as strength,
courage, and discipline, and the cult of Mithras quickly became exceptionally popular among the Roman armed forces.
The Mithraic religion provided divine sanction for human life and especially for
purposeful moral behavior. It brought together a community that welcomed and
nurtured like-minded individuals. Further, it offered hope for individuals who conscientiously observed the cult’s teachings by promising them ecstatic and mysterious
union with Mithras himself. During the late republic, Mithraic altars and temples ap-

ben06937.Ch11_258-285.qxd

8/27/07

8:16 AM

Page 279

CHAPTER 11 |

Mediterranean Society: The Roman Phase

This mithraeum—a shrine to the god Mithras—survives beneath the church of San Clemente
in Rome. Benches accommodated worshipers. The sculpture on the altar depicts Mithras
sacrificing a bull to the god Apollo.

peared in military garrisons throughout the empire. During the early centuries C.E.,
administrators and merchants also became enchanted with Mithras, and his cult attracted followers among the male populations of all sizable communities and commercial centers in the Roman empire.
The cult of Mithras did not admit women, but cults dedicated to the Anatolian
mother goddess Cybele, the Egyptian goddess Isis, and other deities made a place for
both men and women. Indeed, the cult of Isis may have been the most popular of all
the Mediterranean religions of salvation before the rise of Christianity. Devotees built
temples to Isis throughout the Roman empire, and they adored the Egyptian goddess
as a benevolent and protective deity who nurtured her worshipers and helped them
cope with the stresses of life in cosmopolitan society. Like the Mithraic religion, the
cult of Isis and other religions of salvation attracted followers in Rome and other cities
throughout the Mediterranean basin. The immense popularity of these religions of
salvation provides a context that helps to explain the remarkable success of Christianity in the Roman empire.

Cult of Isis

Judaism and Early Christianity
After the dissolution of the Jewish kingdom of David and Solomon in the tenth century B.C.E., the Jewish people maintained their faith and their communities under various imperial regimes: Babylonian, Achaemenid, Alexandrian, Seleucid, and Roman. All
these empires embraced many different ethnic and religious groups and mostly tolerated the cultural preferences of their subjects, providing that communities paid their
taxes and refrained from rebellious activities. In an effort to encourage political loyalty,
these empires often created state cults that honored their emperors as gods, and they
sometimes called for subjects to participate in the cults and revere the emperor-gods.
That requirement created a serious problem for the strictly monotheistic Jews, who
recognized only their god, Yahweh, as divine. Jews considered the pretensions of the

The Jews and
the Empire

279

ben06937.Ch11_258-285.qxd

280

PART II |

8/27/07

Page 280

The Formation of Classical Societies, 500 B.C.E. to 500 C.E.

The Essenes

Jesus of Nazareth

Jesus’ Early Followers

Paul of Tarsus

8:16 AM

state cults to be blasphemy, and many of them refused to pay homage to a mortal being
who laid claim to divinity. Sometimes they even declined to pay taxes to regimes that
required subjects to revere their emperors. Relations between Jews and imperial authorities became especially tense as the Romans extended their empire in the eastern
Mediterranean region. Between the third century B.C.E. and the first century C.E., Jews
in Palestine mounted several rebellions against their Seleucid and Roman overlords.
Ultimately the resistance failed, and Roman forces decisively defeated the rebels during
the Jewish War of 66 to 70 C.E.
While some Jews actively fought the Romans, others founded new sects that
looked for saviors to deliver them from subjection. The Essenes formed one such
sect. In 1947 shepherds accidentally discovered some Essene writings known as the
Dead Sea scrolls, which have shed fascinating light on the sect and its beliefs. The
Essenes formed their community in Palestine during the first century B.C.E. They observed a strict moral code and participated in rituals designed to reinforce a sense of
community: they admitted new members after a rite of baptism in water, and they
took part in ritual community meals. They also looked for a savior who would deliver them from Roman rule and lead them in the establishment of a community in
which they could practice their faith without interference.
The early Christians probably had little contact with the Essenes, but they shared
many of the same concerns. The Christians formed their community around Jesus of
Nazareth, a charismatic Jewish teacher whom they recognized as their savior. Born
about the year 4 B.C.E., Jesus grew up at a time of high tension between Roman overlords and their Jewish subjects. He was a peaceful man who taught devotion to God
and love for fellow human beings. He attracted large crowds because of a reputation
for wisdom and miraculous powers, especially the ability to heal the sick.
Yet Jesus alarmed the Romans because he also taught that “the kingdom of God
is at hand.” To Jesus, the kingdom of God may well have referred to a spiritual realm
in which God would gather those faithful to him. To Roman administrators, however, his message carried political overtones: an impending kingdom of God sounded
like a threat to Roman rule in Palestine, especially since enthusiastic crowds routinely
accompanied Jesus. In an effort to forestall a new round of rebellion, Roman administrators executed Jesus by fixing him to a cross in the early 30s C.E.
Jesus’ crucifixion did not put an end to his movement. Even after his execution
Jesus’ close followers strongly felt his presence and proclaimed that he had triumphed
over death by rising from his grave. They called him “Christ,” meaning “the anointed
one,” the savior who would bring individuals into the kingdom of God. They taught
that he was the son of God and that his sacrifice served to offset the sins of those who
had faith in him. They taught further that like Jesus, the faithful would survive death
and would experience eternal life in the spiritual kingdom of God. Following Jesus’
teachings, the early Christians observed a demanding moral code and devoted themselves uncompromisingly to God. They also compiled a body of writings—accounts
of Jesus’ life, reports of his followers’ works, and letters outlining Christian teachings—that gained recognition as the New Testament. Together with the Jews’ Hebrew
scriptures, which Christians referred to as the Old Testament, the New Testament became the holy book of Christianity.
Jesus and his earliest followers were all Jews. Beginning about the middle of the
first century C.E., however, some Christians avidly sought converts from non-Jewish
communities in the Hellenistic world and the Roman empire. The principal figure in
the expansion of Christianity beyond Judaism was Paul of Tarsus, a Jew from Anatolia
who zealously preached his faith, especially in the Greek-speaking eastern region of
the Roman empire. Paul taught a Christianity that attracted the urban masses in the

ben06937.Ch11_258-285.qxd

8/27/07

8:16 AM

Page 281

CHAPTER 11 |

Mediterranean Society: The Roman Phase

281

Sources from the Past
Jesus’ Moral and Ethical Teachings
Several accounts of Jesus’ life record the Sermon on the Mount in which Jesus challenged his followers to honor God and
observe a demanding code of ethics. Here Jesus explicitly instructed his listeners to reject moral and legal principles that
southwest Asian peoples had followed since the third millennium B.C.E. and that the Babylonian emperor Hammurabi
had enshrined in his famous code of laws about 1750 B.C.E. Jesus enjoined them to refrain from revenge against those
who had caused them harm, for example, and instead to repay harm with kindness.
Blessed are the poor in spirit: for theirs is the kingdom
of heaven. Blessed are they that mourn: for they shall be
comforted. Blessed are the meek: for they shall inherit
the earth. Blessed are they which do hunger and thirst
after righteousness: for they shall be filled. Blessed are
the merciful: for they shall obtain mercy. Blessed are the
pure in heart: for they shall see God. Blessed are the
peacemakers: for they shall be called the children of
God. Blessed are they which are persecuted for righteousness’s sake: for theirs is the kingdom of heaven.
Blessed are ye when men shall revile you and persecute
you and shall say all manner of evil against you falsely
for my sake. Rejoice, and be exceeding glad: for great is
your reward in heaven. . . .
Ye have heard that it hath been said, “An eye for an
eye, and a tooth for a tooth.” But I say unto you that ye
resist not evil: but whosoever shall smite thee on thy
right cheek, turn to him the other also. And if any man
will sue thee at the law, and take away thy coat, let him
have thy cloak also. And whosoever shall compel thee to
go a mile, go with him two. Give to him that asketh
thee, and from him that would borrow of thee turn not
thou away.
Ye have heard that it hath been said, “Thou shalt
love thy neighbour, and hate thine enemy.” But I say
SOURCE:

unto you, love your enemies, bless them that curse you,
do good to them that hate you, and pray for them which
despitefully use you and persecute you, that ye may be
the children of your Father which is in heaven: for he
maketh his sun to rise on the evil and on the good, and
sendeth rain on the just and on the unjust. . . .
Ask, and it shall be given you; seek, and ye shall find;
knock, and it shall be opened unto you. For every one
that asketh receiveth; and he that seeketh findeth; and
to him that knocketh it shall be opened. What man is
there of you, whom if his son ask bread, will he give him
a stone? Or if he ask a fish, will he give him a serpent? If
ye then, being evil, know how to give good gifts unto
your children, how much more shall your Father which
is in heaven give good things to them that ask him?
Therefore all things whatsoever ye would that men
should do to you, do ye even so to them.
FOR FURTHER REFLECTION

Compare and contrast Jesus’ moral teachings with the
Zoroastrian, Confucian, Daoist, Buddhist, Hindu, and
Socratic views discussed in earlier chapters.

Matthew 5:3–13, 5:38–45, 7:7–12 (Authorized Version). (Translation slightly modified.)

same way as other religions of salvation that spread widely in the Roman empire. His
doctrine called for individuals to observe high moral standards and to place their faith
ahead of personal and family interests. His teaching also explained the world and
human history as the results of God’s purposeful activity and so provided a framework
of meaning for individuals’ lives. Furthermore, Paul’s doctrine promised a glorious
future existence for those who conscientiously observed the faith.
Like missionaries of other faiths, Paul was no stranger to Roman roads and Mediterranean sea lanes. He traveled widely in search of converts and made several journeys
through Greece, Anatolia, Syria, and Palestine to visit fledgling Christian communities
and offer them guidance. His last journey took him by ship from Palestine to Rome,

ben06937.Ch11_258-285.qxd

282

PART II |

Early Christian
Communities

The Growth of
Early Christianity

8/27/07

8:16 AM

Page 282

The Formation of Classical Societies, 500 B.C.E. to 500 C.E.

where he took the opportunity to promote Christianity and seek converts for about
two years before losing his appeal to the emperor and suffering execution.
For two centuries after the crucifixion of Jesus, there was no central authority for
the fledgling church. Rather, individual communities selected supervisors, known as
bishops, who oversaw priests and governed their jurisdictions according to their best
understanding of Christian doctrine. As a result, until the emergence of Rome as the
principal seat of church authority in the third century C.E., Christians held doctrinal
views and followed practices that varied considerably from one community to the
next: as different groups of people adopted Christianity, they interpreted Christian
teachings in very different ways, just as different communities had earlier understood
the cults of Mithras, Isis, and other deities in their own ways.
Early Christians generated a large number of writings to express their various
understandings of Christianity and its implications. After the third century C.E., church
authorities suppressed many of those writings and declared them heretical. Yet dozens
of letters, gospels, and interpretative historical accounts survive to document the complexity and diversity of early Christian teachings. Some early Christians maintained that
the faithful must accept specific doctrines, whereas others encouraged believers to find
truth within themselves and express it in their own ways. Some religious leaders taught
that Jesus had literally risen from the dead and come back to life, whereas others held
that his resurrection was a spiritual rather than physical matter. Some communities forbade women to play active public roles in the church, but others allowed women to
serve as priests. Some congregations permitted individuals to seek their own understanding of spiritual matters, but others insisted that access to spiritual truth was available only through properly ordained priests and bishops. Early Christianity was indeed
a remarkably diverse faith. Only gradually did believers agree to recognize certain texts—
the New Testament—as authoritative scripture and adopt them as fundamental guides
for Christian doctrine and practice.
Like the Jews from whose ranks they had sprung, the early Christians refused to
honor the Roman state cults or revere the emperor as a god. As a result, Roman imperial authorities launched sporadic campaigns of persecution designed to eliminate
Christianity as a threat to the empire. In spite of that repression, Christian numbers
grew rapidly. During the first three centuries of the faith’s existence, Christianity found
its way to almost all parts of the Roman empire, and Christians established thriving
communities throughout the Mediterranean basin and farther east in Mesopotamia
and Iran. Rome itself had a sizable Christian population by 300 C.E.
The remarkable growth of Christianity reflected the new faith’s appeal particularly
to the lower classes, urban populations, and women. Christianity accorded honor and
dignity to individuals who did not enjoy high standing in Roman society, and it endowed them with a sense of spiritual freedom more meaningful than wealth, power,
or social prominence. Unlike the popular cult of Mithras, which admitted only men,
Christianity taught the spiritual equality of the sexes and welcomed the contributions
of both men and women. Like Mithraism and other religions of salvation, Christianity
provided a sense of purpose and a promise of future glory for those who placed their
faith in Jesus. Thus, although Christianity originated as a minor sect of Judaism, urban
populations in the Roman empire embraced the new faith with such enthusiasm that
by the third century C.E. it had become the most dynamic and influential religious
faith in the Mediterranean basin.

ben06937.Ch11_258-285.qxd

8/27/07

8:16 AM

Page 283

CHAPTER 11 |

U

Mediterranean Society: The Roman Phase

nder Roman influence Mediterranean lands became a tightly integrated society. The
Roman empire provided a political structure that administered lands as distant as

Mesopotamia and Britain. Highly organized trade networks enabled peoples throughout
the empire to concentrate on specialized agricultural or industrial production and to import foods and other goods that they did not produce themselves. Popular religions
spread widely and attracted enthusiastic converts. Like Confucianism and Buddhism in
classical China and India, rational philosophy and Christianity became prominent sources
of intellectual and religious authority in the classical Mediterranean and continued to influence cultural development in the Mediterranean, Europe, and southwest Asia over the
long term.

C H R O N O L O G Y
753 B.C.E.

Founding of Rome, according to tradition

509 B.C.E.

Establishment of the Roman republic

264 –146 B.C.E.

Roman expansion in the Mediterranean basin

106– 43 B.C.E.

Life of Marcus Tullius Cicero

first century B.C.E.

Civil war in Rome

46–44 B.C.E.

Rule of Gaius Julius Caesar as dictator

31 B.C.E.–14 C.E.

Rule of Augustus

4 B.C.E.– early 30s C.E.

Life of Jesus of Nazareth

first century C.E.

Life of Paul of Tarsus

66–70 C.E.

Jewish War

283

ben06937.Ch11_258-285.qxd

284
F O R

PART II |

8/27/07

8:16 AM

Page 284

The Formation of Classical Societies, 500 B.C.E. to 500 C.E.

F U R T H E R

R E A D I N G

Henry C. Boren. Roman Society. 2nd ed. Lexington, 1992. An
authoritative synthesis that places social and economic history
in its political context.
Keith R. Bradley. Discovering the Roman Family: Studies in Roman
Social History. New York, 1991. A provocative analysis of
Roman family life with illustrations from individual experiences.
———. Slavery and Society at Rome. Cambridge, 1994. An engaging and readable essay on slavery and its role in Roman
society, with special attention to individual experiences.
Peter Brown. The Rise of Western Christendom: Triumph and Diversity, A.D. 200–1000. 2nd ed. Oxford, 2003. A landmark
analysis of early Christian history by an unusually perceptive
scholar.
Barry Cunliffe. Greeks, Romans, and Barbarians: Spheres of Interaction. New York, 1988. Draws on archaeological evidence in
assessing the effects of the Roman presence in Gaul, Britain,
and Germany.
M. I. Finley. Ancient Slavery and Modern Ideology. Expanded ed.
Princeton, 1998. A thoughtful analysis of Greek and Roman
slavery in light of modern slavery and contemporary debates.
Michael Grant. Cities of Vesuvius: Pompeii and Herculaneum.
London, 1971. Fascinating glimpse of Roman society as reconstructed by archaeologists working at sites destroyed by
the eruption of Vesuvius in 79 C.E.
A. H. M. Jones. Augustus. New York, 1970. A distinguished historian of ancient Rome provides the best study of Augustus and
his career.
Naphtali Lewis and Meyer Reinhold, eds. Roman Civilization:
Selected Readings. 2 vols. 3rd ed. New York, 1990. A rich
collection of translated texts and documents that illuminate
Roman history and society.

Paul MacKendrick. The Mute Stones Speak: The Story of Archaeology in Italy. New York, 1960. An older but engaging work
with still valuable information on Roman architecture and
construction techniques.
Ramsay MacMullen. Christianizing the Roman Empire. New
Haven, 1984. Scholarly study of the processes by which Christianity became established in the Roman empire.
Harold Mattingly. The Man in the Roman Street. New York, 1966.
An engaging study of popular culture and religion in the
Roman empire.
Elaine Pagels. Adam, Eve, and the Serpent. New York, 1988.
Provocative and fascinating analysis of early Christianity and
its relationship with the Roman state.
———. Beyond Belief: The Secret Gospel of Thomas. New York,
2003. Explores some of the many diverse understandings of
Christianity in the early years of the faith.
———. The Gnostic Gospels. New York, 1979. Fascinating reconstruction of some little-known early Christian communities.
Sarah B. Pomeroy. Goddesses, Whores, Wives, and Slaves: Women
in Classical Antiquity. New York, 1975. Outstanding study
analyzing the status and role of women in classical Greece
and Rome.
Romolo Augusto Staccioli. The Roads of the Romans. Los Angeles, 2003. A well-illustrated volume that surveys the entire
Roman road system.
Geza Vermes. The Dead Sea Scrolls: Qumran in Perspective. Rev.
ed. London, 1994. A reliable introduction to scholarship on
the Dead Sea scrolls and the community that produced them.
———. The Dead Sea Scrolls in English. 4th ed. London, 1995.
Translations of the major texts from the Dead Sea scrolls that
throw light on the Essenes and their beliefs.

ben06937.Ch11_258-285.qxd

8/27/07

8:16 AM

Page 285


