Silk Roads

Page 286

Cross-Cultural Exchanges
on the Silk Roads

ben06937.Ch12_286-312.qxd

8/27/07

8:17 AM

Page 287

Long-Distance Trade and
the Silk Roads Network
Trade Networks of the Hellenistic Era
The Silk Roads

China after the Han Dynasty
Internal Decay of the Han State
Cultural Change in Post-Han China

The Fall of the Roman Empire
Cultural and Biological Exchanges
along the Silk Roads
The Spread of Buddhism and Hinduism
The Spread of Christianity
The Spread of Manichaeism
The Spread of Epidemic Disease

Internal Decay in the Roman Empire
Germanic Invasions and the Fall
of the Western Roman Empire
Cultural Change in the Late Roman Empire

In the year 139 B.C.E., the Chinese emperor Han Wudi sent an envoy named Zhang Qian on
a mission to lands west of China. The emperor’s purpose was to find allies who could help
combat the nomadic Xiongnu, who menaced the northern and western borders of the Han
empire. From captives he had learned that other nomadic peoples in far western lands bore
grudges against the Xiongnu, and he reasoned that they might ally with Han forces to pressure their common enemy.
The problem for Zhang Qian was that to communicate with potential allies against the
Xiongnu, he had to pass directly through lands they controlled. Soon after Zhang Qian left Han
territory, Xiongnu forces captured him. For ten years the Xiongnu held him in comfortable captivity: they allowed him to keep his personal servant, and they provided him with a Xiongnu
wife, with whom he had a son. When suspicions about him subsided, however, Zhang Qian escaped with his family and servant. He even had the presence of mind to keep with him the yak
tail that Han Wudi had given him as a sign of his ambassadorial status. He fled to the west and
traveled as far as Bactria, but he did not succeed in lining up allies against the Xiongnu. While
returning to China, Zhang Qian again fell into Xiongnu hands but managed to escape after one
year’s detention when the death of the Xiongnu leader led to a period of turmoil. In 126 B.C.E.
Zhang Qian and his party returned to China and a warm welcome from Han Wudi.
Although his diplomatic efforts did not succeed, Zhang Qian’s mission had far-reaching
consequences. Apart from political and military intelligence about western lands and their
peoples, Zhang Qian also brought back information of immense commercial value. While in
Bactria about 128 B.C.E., he noticed Chinese goods—textiles and bamboo articles—offered for
sale in local markets. Upon inquiry he learned that they had come from southwest China by
way of Bengal. From that information he deduced the possibility of establishing trade relations between China and Bactria through India.
Han Wudi responded enthusiastically to that idea and dreamed of trading with peoples
inhabiting lands west of China. From 102 to 98 B.C.E., he mounted an ambitious campaign
that broke the power of the Xiongnu and pacified central Asia. His conquests simplified trade
relations, since it became unnecessary to route commerce through India. The intelligence
that Zhang Qian gathered during his travels thus contributed to the opening of the silk roads—
the network of trade routes that linked lands as distant as China and the Roman empire—and
more generally to the establishment of relations between China and lands to the west.
China and other classical societies imposed political and military control over vast territories. They promoted trade and communication within their own empires, bringing regions that
had previously been self-sufficient into a larger economy and society. They also fostered the
OPPOSITE:

Ruins of the ancient city of Khocho (Gaochang), near Turpan
on the northern silk road.

287

ben06937.Ch12_286-312.qxd

288

PART II |

8/27/07

8:17 AM

Page 288

The Formation of Classical Societies, 500 B.C.E. to 500 C.E.
spread of cultural and religious traditions to distant regions, and they encouraged the construction of institutional frameworks that promoted the long-term survival of those traditions.
The influence of the classical societies did not stop at the imperial boundaries. Nearby
peoples regarded their powerful neighbors with a mixture of envy and suspicion, and they
sought to share the wealth that those neighbors generated. They pursued that goal by various means, both peaceful and violent, and relations with neighboring peoples, particularly
nomadic peoples, became a major preoccupation of all the classical societies.
Beyond their relations with neighboring peoples, the classical societies established a
broad zone of communication and exchange throughout much of the earth’s eastern hemisphere. Trade networks crossed the deserts of central Asia and the breadth of the Indian
Ocean. Long-distance trade passed through much of Eurasia and north Africa, from China to
the Mediterranean basin, and to parts of sub-Saharan Africa as well.
This long-distance trade profoundly influenced the experiences of peoples and the development of societies throughout the eastern hemisphere. It brought wealth and access to foreign products, and it enabled peoples to concentrate their efforts on economic activities best
suited to their regions. It facilitated the spread of religious traditions beyond their original
homelands, since merchants carried their beliefs and sometimes attracted converts in the
lands they visited. It also facilitated the transmission of disease: pathogens traveled the trade
routes alongside commercial wares and religious faiths. Indeed, the transmission of disease
over the silk roads helped bring an end to the classical societies, since infectious and contagious diseases sparked devastating epidemics that caused political, social, and economic
havoc. Long-distance trade thus had deep political, social, and cultural as well as economic
and commercial implications for classical societies.

Long-Distance Trade
and the Silk Roads Network
Ever since the earliest days of history, human communities have traded with one another, sometimes over long distances. Before classical times, however, long-distance
trade was a risky venture. Ancient societies often policed their realms effectively, but
since they were relatively small and compact, extensive regions lay beyond their control. Trade passing between societies was therefore liable to interception by bandits or
pirates. That risk increased the costs of long-distance transactions in ancient times.
During the classical era, two developments reduced the risks associated with travel
and stimulated long-distance trade. In the first, rulers invested heavily in the construction of roads and bridges. They undertook those expensive projects primarily for military and administrative reasons, but roads also had the effect of encouraging trade
within individual societies and facilitating exchanges between different societies. In the
second, classical societies built large imperial states that sometimes expanded to the
point that they bordered on one another: the campaigns of Alexander of Macedon, for
example, brought Hellenistic and Indian societies into direct contact, and only small
buffer states separated the Roman and Parthian empires. Even when they did not encounter each other so directly, classical empires pacified large stretches of Eurasia and
north Africa. As a result, merchants did not face such great risk as in previous eras, the
costs of long-distance trade dropped, and its volume rose dramatically.

Trade Networks of the Hellenistic Era
The tempo of long-distance trade increased noticeably during the Hellenistic era,
partly because of the many colonies established by Alexander of Macedon and the

ben06937.Ch12_286-312.qxd

8/27/07

8:17 AM

Page 289

CHAPTER 12 |

Cross-Cultural Exchanges on the Silk Roads

289

Parthian merchants and other travelers like the soldiers depicted here followed in the
footsteps of their Achaemenid and Seleucid predecessors and became regular visitors to
northern India. This gray schist carving from Gandhara dates from the second century B.C.E.

Seleucid rulers in Persia and Bactria. Though originally populated by military forces
and administrators, these settlements soon attracted Greek merchants and bankers
who linked the recently conquered lands to the Mediterranean basin. The Seleucid
rulers worked diligently to promote trade. They controlled land routes linking Bactria, which offered access to Indian markets, to Mediterranean ports in Syria and
Palestine. Archaeologists have unearthed hundreds of coins, pieces of jewelry, and
other physical remains, including Greek-style sculptures and buildings, that testify to
the presence of Greek communities in Persia and Bactria during the Hellenistic era.
Like the Seleucids, the Ptolemies maintained land routes—in their case, routes
going south from Egypt to the kingdom of Nubia and Meroë in east Africa—but
they also paid close attention to sea lanes and maritime trade. They ousted pirates
from sea-lanes linking the Red Sea to the Arabian Sea and the Indian Ocean. They
also built several new ports, the most important being Berenice on the Red Sea, and
Alexandria served as their principal window on the Mediterranean.
Even more important, perhaps, mariners from Ptolemaic Egypt learned about the
monsoon winds that governed sailing and shipping in the Indian Ocean. During the
summer the winds blow regularly from the southwest, whereas in the winter they
blow from the northeast. Knowledge of these winds enabled mariners to sail safely
and reliably to all parts of the Indian Ocean basin. During the second century B.C.E.,
Hellenistic mariners learned the rhythm of these winds from Arab and Indian seamen
whose ancestors had sailed before the monsoons for centuries. Merchant seamen then
established regular links by way of the Red Sea between India and Arabia in the east
and Egypt and the Mediterranean basin in the west.
Establishment and maintenance of these trade routes was an expensive affair calling for substantial investment in military forces, construction, and bureaucracies to
administer the commerce that passed over the routes. But the investment paid handsome dividends. Long-distance trade stimulated economic development within the
Hellenistic realms themselves, bringing benefits to local economies throughout the
empires. Moreover, Hellenistic rulers closely supervised foreign trade and levied taxes
on it, thereby deriving income from even foreign products.

The Monsoon System

ben06937.Ch12_286-312.qxd

290

PART II |

Trade in the
Hellenistic World

8/27/07

8:17 AM

Page 290

The Formation of Classical Societies, 500 B.C.E. to 500 C.E.

With official encouragement, a substantial trade developed throughout the Hellenistic world, from Bactria and India in the east to the Mediterranean basin in the
west. Spices, pepper, cosmetics, gems, and pearls from India traveled by caravan and
ship to Hellenistic cities and ports. Grain from Persia and Egypt fed urban populations in distant lands. Mediterranean wine, olive oil, jewelry, and works of art made
their way to Persia and Bactria. And throughout the region from India to the Mediterranean, merchants conducted a brisk trade in slaves, largely kidnapping victims or
prisoners of war.
Indeed, maritime trade networks through the Indian Ocean linked not only the
large classical societies of Eurasia and north Africa but also smaller societies in east
Africa. During the late centuries B.C.E., the port of Rhapta emerged as the principal
commercial center on the east African coast. Archaeologists have not discovered the
precise location of Rhapta, but it probably was located near modern Dar es Salaam in
Tanzania. With increasing trade, groups of professional merchants and entrepreneurs
emerged at Rhapta, and coins came into general use on the east African coast. Merchants of Rhapta imported iron goods such as spears, axes, and knives from southern
Arabia and the eastern Mediterranean region in exchange for ivory, rhinoceros horn,
tortoise shell, and slaves obtained from interior regions. Just as trade in the Mediterranean basin encouraged economic and political development in regions such as western Europe, far-flung commercial networks of the Hellenistic era fostered economic
organization and the emergence of states in the distant lands that they brought into
interaction.

The Silk Roads

Overland
Trade Routes

The establishment of classical empires greatly expanded the scope of long-distance
trade, as large portions of Eurasia and north Africa fell under the sway of one classical society or another. The Han empire maintained order in China and pacified much
of central Asia, including a sizable corridor offering access to Bactria and western
markets. The Parthian empire displaced the Seleucids in Persia and extended its authority to Mesopotamia. The Roman empire brought order to the Mediterranean
basin. With the decline of the Mauryan dynasty, India lacked a strong imperial state,
but the Kushan empire and other regional states provided stability and security, particularly in northern India, that favored long-distance trade.
As the classical empires expanded, merchants and travelers created an extensive
network of trade routes that linked much of Eurasia and north Africa. Historians
refer to these routes collectively as the silk roads, since high-quality silk from China
was one of the principal commodities exchanged over the roads. The overland silk
roads took caravan trade from China to the Roman empire, thus linking the extreme
ends of the Eurasian landmass. From the Han capital of Chang’an, the main silk road
went west until it arrived at the Taklamakan desert, also known as the Tarim Basin.
This desert is one of the most dangerous and inhospitable regions of the earth: its
very name, Taklamakan, warns that “he who enters does not come back out.” The
silk road then split into two main branches that skirted the desert proper and passed
through oasis towns that ringed it to the north and south. The branches came together at Kashgar (now known as Kashi, located in the westernmost corner of modern China). From there the reunited road went west to Bactria, where a branch
forked off to offer access to Taxila and northern India, while the principal route continued across northern Iran. There it joined with roads to ports on the Caspian Sea
and the Persian Gulf and proceeded to Palmyra (in modern Syria), where it met roads
coming from Arabia and ports on the Red Sea. Continuing west, it terminated at the
Mediterranean ports of Antioch (in modern Turkey) and Tyre (in modern Lebanon).

ben06937.Ch12_286-312.qxd

8/27/07

8:17 AM

Page 291

CHAPTER 12 |

Cross-Cultural Exchanges on the Silk Roads

A cave painting from the late seventh century C.E. depicts the Chinese emperor Han Wudi (seated on horse) as he
dispatches Zhang Qian (kneeling at left) on his mission to western lands in search of an alliance against the Xiongnu.

The silk roads also included a network of sea-lanes that sustained maritime commerce throughout much of the eastern hemisphere. From Guangzhou in southern
China, sea-lanes through the South China Sea linked the east Asian seaboard to the
mainland and the islands of southeast Asia. Routes linking southeast Asia with Ceylon (modern Sri Lanka) and India were especially busy during classical times. From
India, sea-lanes passed through the Arabian Sea to Persia and Arabia, and through
the Persian Gulf and the Red Sea they offered access to land routes and the Mediterranean basin, which already possessed a well-developed network of trade routes.
A wide variety of manufactured products and agricultural commodities traveled
over the silk roads. Generally speaking, silk and spices traveled west from producers in
southeast Asia, China, and India to consumers in central Asia, Iran, Arabia, and the
Roman empire (including Egypt and north Africa as well as the European regions of
the empire). Silk came mostly from China, the only land in classical times where cultivators and weavers had developed techniques for producing high-quality silk fabrics.
The fine spices—cloves, nutmeg, mace, and cardamom—all came from southeast Asia.
Ginger came from China, cinnamon from China and southeast Asia, pepper from
India, and sesame oil from India, Arabia, and southwest Asia. Spices were extremely
important commodities in classical times because they had many more uses than they
do in the modern world. They served not only as condiments and flavoring agents
but also as drugs, anesthetics, aphrodisiacs, perfumes, aromatics, and magical potions.

Sea-Lanes and
Maritime Trade

Trade Goods

291

ben06937.Ch12_286-312.qxd

PART II |

Page 292

The Formation of Classical Societies, 500 B.C.E. to 500 C.E.

ea
an S
spi

at

T U R K E S TA N

Bukhara
Merv

KAN
AMA
KL ERT
A
S
T DE

Kashgar

BACTR IA

Yellow

Dunhuang

n
ua
(H

Khotan

e

PE R S IA

Palmyra

Taxila

rsi
Pe

du

EGYPT

nge

Barbarikon
Barygaza

ARAB IA

Red
Sea

Ga

In

Gulf

Berenice

HI

MA

L A YA S

an

gz

i

gH

e)

Luoyang

Chang’an

s

an

Nile

M O N G O LI A

Turpan

ris
s
Tig

r
ph
Eu

Antioch

dite
rranea
n Se a
Tyre

Aral
Sea

Ca

Black Sea
Byzantium

Me

8:17 AM

Y

292

8/27/07

(Chang Jiang)

C H I NA

s

Guangzhou

I N DIA
Bay
of Bengal
Arikamedu

Arabian
Sea
Muziris

South
China
Sea

Isthmus
of Kra
MA

Y
LA

A

INDIAN OCEAN

Land routes

Strait
of Melaka
SUMATRA

BORNEO

Sea routes
0
0

Map 12.1 The silk roads,
200 B.C.E.–300 C.E. Note the
extent of the land and sea
routes known collectively as
the silk roads. Consider the
political and economic conditions that would be necessary
for regular travel and trade
across the silk roads.

500
1000

1000

1500 mi
2000

3000 km

JAVA

Apart from spices, India also exported cotton textiles and valuable exotic items such
as pearls, coral, and ivory.
Central Asian and Mediterranean lands exchanged a variety of manufactured goods
and other commodities for the silks and spices that they imported. Central Asia produced large, strong horses and high-quality jade, much prized in China by stone
carvers. From the Roman empire came glassware, jewelry, works of art, decorative
items, perfumes, bronze goods, wool and linen textiles, pottery, iron tools, olive oil,
wine, and gold and silver bullion. Mediterranean merchants and manufacturers often
imported raw materials such as uncut gemstones, which they exported as finished
products in the form of expensive jewelry and decorative items.
Some individuals made very long journeys during classical times: Zhang Qian ventured from China as far west as Bactria; Chinese merchants traveled regularly to central Asia and Persia; several Indian embassies called on Roman emperors; Roman
merchants traveled by sea at least as far east as southern India; and Malay merchant
mariners sailed from the islands of southeast Asia to India and east Africa. On a few
occasions individuals even traveled across much or all of the eastern hemisphere between China and the Roman empire. A Chinese ambassador named Gang Ying embarked on a mission to distant western lands in 97 C.E. and proceeded as far as
Mesopotamia before reports of the long and dangerous journey ahead persuaded him
to return home. And Chinese sources reported the arrival in 166 C.E. of a delegation
claiming to represent the Roman emperor Marcus Aurelius. No information survives
to throw light on the experiences of this party—or even to confirm its identity—but

ben06937.Ch12_286-312.qxd

8/27/07

8:17 AM

Page 293

CHAPTER 12 |

Cross-Cultural Exchanges on the Silk Roads

Roman subjects from Egypt or Syria might
well have traveled as far as China in search
of trading opportunities.
Individual merchants did not usually
travel from one end of Eurasia to the other.
Instead, they handled long-distance trade
in stages. On the caravan routes between
China and Bactria, for example, Chinese
and central Asian nomadic peoples dominated trade. Rarely if ever did they go farther west, however, because the Parthians
took advantage of their power and geographic position to control overland trade
within their boundaries and to reserve it for
their subjects. Once it reached Palmyra,
merchandise passed mostly into the hands
of Roman subjects such as Greeks, Jews,
and Armenians, who were especially active
During the first century B.C.E. Romans
in the commercial life of the Mediterranean
developed advanced glass-blowing
basin.
techniques that enabled them to produce
Meanwhile, on the seas, other peoples
wares such as this jar that were popular
became involved in long-distance trade.
with wealthy consumers.
From south China through southeast Asia
to Ceylon and India, the principal figures
were Malay and Indian mariners. In the
Arabian Sea, Persians joined Egyptian and
Greek subjects of the Roman empire as the
most prominent trading peoples. The Parthian empire largely controlled trade in the
Persian Gulf, whereas the Ptolemaic dynasty
and later the Roman empire dominated affairs in the Red Sea. After Roman emperors absorbed Egypt in the first century
C.E., their subjects carried on an especially
brisk trade between India and the Mediterranean. The Greek geographer Strabo
reported in the early first century C.E. that
as many as 120 ships departed annually
A Roman coin dated 189 C.E. depicts a
from the Red Sea for India. Archaeologists
merchant ship near the lighthouse at
have unearthed the remains of a Roman
Alexandria. Ships like this one regularly
trading outpost at Arikamedu, near modpicked up pepper and cinnamon from
ern Pondicherry in southern India, and litIndia along with other cargoes.
erary sources report that merchants subject
to Roman rule established Indian colonies
also at Muziris (near modern Cranganore), Barygaza (near modern Broach), Barbarikon (near modern Karachi), and other sites as well. Meanwhile, since the mid-first
century C.E., the Romans also had dominated both the eastern and the western regions of mare nostrum, the Mediterranean.
It is impossible to determine the quantity or value of trade that passed over the
silk roads in classical times, but it clearly made a deep impression on contemporaries.
By the first century C.E., pepper cinnamon, and other spices graced the tables of the

293

The Organization of
Long-Distance Trade

ben06937.Ch12_286-312.qxd

294

PART II |

8/27/07

8:17 AM

Page 294

The Formation of Classical Societies, 500 B.C.E. to 500 C.E.

A mosaic of the second century C.E. depicts a musician playing flutes
and a dancer wearing a thin and revealing silk garment.

wealthy classes in the Roman empire, where silk garments had become items of high
fashion. Indeed, silk was in such demand that Roman merchants often stretched their
supplies by unraveling the densely woven fabrics that came from China and then
reweaving them into larger numbers of sheer garments that were sometimes so light
as to be transparent. Some Romans fretted that see-through silk attire would lead to
moral decay, and others worried that hefty expenditures for luxury items would ruin
the imperial economy. In both cases their anxieties testified to the powerful attraction of imported silks and spices for Roman consumers.
As it happened, long-distance trade did not cause moral or economic problems
for the Roman empire or any other state in classical times. Indeed, it more likely
stimulated rather than threatened local economies. Yet long-distance trade did not
occur in a vacuum. Commercial exchanges encouraged cultural and biological exchanges, some of which had large implications for classical societies.

Cultural and Biological Exchanges
along the Silk Roads
The silk roads served as magnificent highways for merchants and their commodities,
but others also took advantage of the opportunities they offered to travel in relative

ben06937.Ch12_286-312.qxd

8/27/07

8:17 AM

Page 295

CHAPTER 12 |

Cross-Cultural Exchanges on the Silk Roads

295

safety over long distances. Merchants, missionaries, and other travelers carried their
beliefs, values, and religious convictions to distant lands: Buddhism, Hinduism, and
Christianity all traveled the silk roads and attracted converts far from their original
homelands. Meanwhile, invisible travelers such as disease pathogens also crossed the
silk roads and touched off devastating epidemics when they found fresh populations
to infect. Toward the end of the classical era, epidemic disease that was spread over
the silk roads caused dramatic demographic decline especially in China and the
Mediterranean basin and to a lesser extent in other parts of Eurasia as well.

The Spread of Buddhism and Hinduism
By the third century B.C.E., Buddhism had become well established in northern India,
and with the sponsorship of the emperor Ashoka the faith spread to Bactria and Ceylon. Buddhism was particularly successful in attracting merchants as converts. When
they traveled, Buddhist merchants observed their faith among themselves and explained it to others. Gradually, Buddhism made its way along the silk roads to Iran,
central Asia, China, and southeast Asia.
Buddhism first established a presence in the oasis towns along the silk roads—notably Merv, Bukhara, Samarkand, Kashgar, Khotan, Kuqa, Turpan, and Dunhuang—
where merchants and their caravans found food, rest, lodging, and markets. The oases
depended heavily on trade for their prosperity, and they allowed merchants to build
monasteries and invite monks and scribes into their communities. Because they hosted
travelers who came from different lands, spoke different languages, and observed different religious practices, the oasis towns became cosmopolitan centers. As early as
the second century B.C.E., many residents of the oases themselves adopted Buddhism,
which was the most prominent faith of silk roads merchants for more than a millennium, from about 200 B.C.E. to 1000 C.E.
From the oasis communities Buddhism spread to the steppe lands of central Asia
and to China. Nomadic peoples from the steppes visited the oases regularly to trade
animal products from their herds for grains and manufactured items. They often found
Buddhism intriguing, and in the early centuries C.E. they increasingly responded to its
appeal. By the fourth century C.E., they had sponsored the spread of Buddhism
throughout much of central Asia.
By the first century B.C.E., Buddhism had also established a foothold in China.
The earliest Buddhists in China were foreign merchants—Indians, Parthians, and
central Asian peoples—who observed their faith in the enclaves that Han dynasty officials allowed them to inhabit in Chang’an and other major cities. For several centuries Buddhism remained the faith largely of these expatriate merchants, and it did
not appeal very strongly to native Chinese. Yet the presence of monasteries and missionaries offered Buddhism the potential to attract Chinese converts. Beginning
about the fifth century C.E., Chinese began to respond enthusiastically to Buddhism,
which during the postclassical era became the most popular religious faith throughout all of east Asia, including Japan and Korea as well as China.
As Buddhism spread north from India into central Asia and China, both Buddhism and Hinduism also began to attract a following in southeast Asia. Once again,
merchants traveling the silk roads—in this case the sea lanes through the Indian
Ocean—played prominent roles in spreading these faiths. Merchant mariners regularly plied the waters between India and southeast Asia during the late centuries B.C.E.
By the first century C.E., clear signs of Indian cultural influence had appeared in southeast Asia. In Java, Sumatra, and other islands, as well as in the Malay peninsula and
territories in modern Vietnam and Cambodia, rulers of southeast Asian states called
themselves rajas (“kings”), in the manner of Indian rulers, and they adopted Sanskrit

Buddhism in
Central Asia

Buddhism in China

Buddhism and
Hinduism in
Southeast Asia

ben06937.Ch12_286-312.qxd

296

PART II |

8/27/07

8:17 AM

Page 296

The Formation of Classical Societies, 500 B.C.E. to 500 C.E.

as a means of written communication.
Many rulers converted to Buddhism, and
others promoted the Hindu cults of
Shiva and Vishnu. They built walled
cities around lavish temples constructed
in the Indian style. They appointed
Buddhist or Hindu advisors, and they
sought to enhance their authority by associating themselves with honored religious traditions.

The Spread of Christianity

Christianity in the
Mediterranean Basin

Christianity in
Southwest Asia

Early Christians faced intermittent
persecution from Roman officials.
During the early centuries C.E.,
Roman authorities launched a series of campaigns to stamp out
Christianity, since most Christians refused to observe the
state cults that honored emperors as divine beings. Paradoxically, imperial officials
viewed Christians as irreligious because they declined
to participate in state-approved
religious ceremonies. They also
considered Christianity a menEarly Buddhist sculpture in Bactria reflected the influence
ace to society because zealous
of Mediterranean and Greek artistic styles. This seated
missionaries attacked other rliBuddha from the first or second century C.E. bears
gions and generated someCaucasian features and wears Mediterranean-style dress.
times violent conflict. Nevertheless, Christian missionaries
took full advantage of the Romans’ magnificent network of roads and sea-lanes, which
enabled them to carry their message throughout the Roman empire and the Mediterranean basin.
During the second and third centuries C.E., countless missionaries took Paul of
Tarsus as their example and worked zealously to attract converts. One of the more
famous was Gregory the Wonderworker, a tireless missionary with a reputation for
performing miracles, who popularized Christianity in central Anatolia during the
mid-third century C.E. Contemporaries reported that Gregory not only preached
Christian doctrine but also expelled demons, moved boulders, diverted a river in
flood, and persuaded observers that he had access to impressive supernatural powers.
Gregory and his fellow missionaries helped to make Christianity an enormously popular religion of salvation in the Roman empire. By the late third century C.E., in spite
of continuing imperial opposition, devout Christian communities flourished throughout the Mediterranean basin in Anatolia, Syria, Palestine, Egypt, and north Africa as
well as in Greece, Italy, Spain, and Gaul.
As Christianity became a prominent source of religious inspiration within the
Roman empire, the young faith also traveled the trade routes and found followers
beyond the Mediterranean basin. By the second century C.E., sizable Christian com-

ben06937.Ch12_286-312.qxd

8/27/07

8:17 AM

Page 297

CHAPTER 12 |

Cross-Cultural Exchanges on the Silk Roads

297

Rh

in e

Aral
Sea

GAUL
Ca
a
spi

ea

Eu

Tyre

dS

ea

Ni
le

Re

Gu

ell

SIA

n
Ya

H
ng I M A L A Y A S
es

Ga

ER

P
an
rsi
Pe

es

EGYPT
SAHARA DESERT

ph
rat

us

anean
S

ow

n Sea

Carthage M
edite
rr

Kuqa
Bukhara
Turpan
Samarkand AKLAMAKAN
T
T
R
Dunhuang Y
DESE
Merv Kashgar
Khotan
HINDU
Chang’an
KUSH

ris
Tig

Athens ANATOLIA
Antioch
Corinth

Ind

Black Sea

Rome

SPAIN

gz i

C H I NA

lf

ARAB IA

Guangzhou

Arabian
Sea

AFRICA

Luoyang

I N DIA

Bay
of
Bengal

South

SOUTHEAST China
ASIA
Sea

INDIAN
OCEAN

Buddhism
Hinduism
ATLANTIC
OCEAN

Christianity

0
0

500
1000

1000

Straits
of Melaka

1500 mi
2000

3000 km

munities flourished throughout Mesopotamia and Iran, and a few Christian churches
had appeared as far away as India. Christians did not dominate eastern lands as they
did the Roman empire, but they attracted large numbers of converts in southwest
Asia. Indeed, beside Jews and Zoroastrians, Christians constituted one of the major
religious communities in the region, and they remained so even after the seventh
century C.E., when the Islamic faith of Arab Muslim conquerors began to displace
the older religious communities.
Christian communities in Mesopotamia and Iran deeply influenced Christian
practices in the Roman empire. To demonstrate utter loyalty to their faith, Christians
in southwest Asia often followed strict ascetic regimes: inspired by Indian traditions,
they abstained from sexual contact, refused fine foods and other comforts, and sometimes even withdrew from family life and society. These practices impressed devout
Christians in the Roman empire. By the third century C.E., some Mediterranean
Christians had begun to abandon society altogether and live as hermits in the deserts
of Egypt, the mountains of Greece, and other isolated locations. Others withdrew
from lay society but lived in communities of like-minded individuals who devoted
their efforts to prayer and praise of God. Thus ascetic practices of Christians living in
lands east of the Roman empire helped to inspire the formation of Christian monastic communities in the Mediterranean basin.
After the fifth century C.E., Christian communities in southwest Asia and the
Mediterranean basin increasingly went separate ways. Most of the faithful in southwest Asia became Nestorians—followers of the Greek theologian Nestorius, who
lived during the early fifth century and emphasized the human as opposed to the divine nature of Jesus. Mediterranean church authorities rejected Nestorius’s views,
and many of his disciples departed for Mesopotamia and Iran. They soon became

Map 12.2 The spread of
Buddhism, Hinduism, and
Christianity, 200 B.C.E.–
400 C.E. Compare the routes
taken by Buddhism, Hinduism,
and Christianity with the routes
followed by merchants on silk
roads depicted on Map 12.1.
How might you account for the
similarities?

ben06937.Ch12_286-312.qxd

298

PART II |

8/27/07

8:17 AM

Page 298

The Formation of Classical Societies, 500 B.C.E. to 500 C.E.

prominent in local Christian communities, and they introduced a strong organizational framework to the church in southwest Asia. Although they had limited dealings with Mediterranean Christians, the Nestorians spread their faith east across the
silk roads. Nestorian merchants took their faith with them on trade missions, and by
the early seventh century they had established communities in central Asia, India,
and China.

The Spread of Manichaeism
Mani and
Manichaeism

Manichaean Ethics

Decline of
Manichaeism

The explosive spread of Manichaeism dramatically illustrated how missionary religions
made effective use of the silk roads trading network. Manichaeism was the faith derived
from the prophet Mani (216–272 C.E.), a devout Zoroastrian from Babylon in
Mesopotamia. Apart from Zoroastrianism, Mani drew deep influence from Christianity
and Buddhism. He regarded Zarathustra as the prophet of Persia, Buddha as the
prophet of India, and Jesus as the prophet of the Mediterranean world. Because of the
intense interaction between peoples of different societies, Mani saw a need for a
prophet for all humanity, and he promoted a syncretic blend of Zoroastrian, Christian,
and Buddhist elements as a religious faith that would serve the needs of a cosmopolitan world.
Mani was a dualist: he viewed the world as the site of a cosmic struggle between
the forces of light and darkness, good and evil. He associated light with spiritual
awareness and darkness with the material world. He urged his followers to reject
worldly pleasures, which entangled the spirit in matter, and rise toward the light. His
doctrine had strong appeal because it offered a rational explanation for the presence
of good and evil in the world while also providing a means for individuals to achieve
personal salvation and contribute to the triumph of good over evil.
Mani promoted an ascetic lifestyle and insisted that disciples observe high ethical
standards. Devout Manichaeans, known as “the elect,” abstained from marriage,
sexual relations, fine clothing, meat, rich foods, and other personal comforts, dedicating themselves instead to prayer, fasting, and ritual observances. Less zealous
Manichaeans, known as “hearers,” led more conventional lives, but they followed a
strict moral code and provided food and gifts to sustain the elect. All Manichaeans
looked forward to individual salvation and eternal association with the forces of light
and good.
Mani was a fervent missionary: he traveled widely to promote his faith, corresponded tirelessly with Manichaean adherents, and dispatched disciples to lands that
he could not visit himself. He also created a Manichaean church with its own services,
rituals, hymns, and liturgies. His doctrine attracted converts first in Mesopotamia, and
before Mani’s death it had spread throughout the Sasanid empire and into the eastern
Mediterranean region. In spite of its asceticism, Manichaeism appealed especially
strongly to merchants, who adopted the faith as hearers and supported the Manichaean church. By the end of the third century C.E., Manichaean communities had
appeared in all the large cities and trading centers of the Roman empire.
Manichaeism soon came under tremendous pressure. Zoroastrian leaders urged
the Sasanid rulers to suppress Mani’s movement as a threat to public order. Mani himself died in chains as a prisoner of the Sasanid emperor, who sought to use Zoroastrianism as a cultural foundation for the unification of his realm. Authorities in the
Roman empire also persecuted Manichaeans, whom they suspected because of the religion’s origins in the rival Sasanid empire. Indeed, during the fifth and sixth centuries, political authorities largely exterminated Manichaeism in the Mediterranean

ben06937.Ch12_286-312.qxd

8/27/07

8:17 AM

Page 299

CHAPTER 12 |

Cross-Cultural Exchanges on the Silk Roads

299

A cave painting from about the seventh
century C.E. depicts a group of devout
Manichaean faithful, whose austere
regimen called for them to dress in plain
white garments and keep their hair
uncut.

basin. Yet Manichaeism survived in central Asia, where it attracted converts among
nomadic Turkish peoples who traded with merchants from China, India, and southwest Asia. Like Buddhism, Hinduism, and Christianity, then, Manichaeism relied on
the trade routes of classical times to extend its influence to new lands and peoples.

The Spread of Epidemic Disease
Like religious faiths, infectious and contagious diseases also spread along the trade
routes of the classical world. Aided by long-distance travelers, pathogens had opportunities to spread beyond their original environments and attack populations with no
inherited or acquired immunities to the diseases they caused. The resulting epidemics
took a ferocious toll in human lives.

ben06937.Ch12_286-312.qxd

300

PART II |

Epidemic Diseases

Effects of
Epidemic Diseases

8/27/07

8:17 AM

Page 300

The Formation of Classical Societies, 500 B.C.E. to 500 C.E.

Information about human populations in classical times is scanty and full of gaps.
Scholars often do not have records to work with and must draw inferences about
population size from the area enclosed by city walls, the number of houses discovered in a settlement, the agricultural potential of a region, and similar considerations.
As a result, population estimates for premodern societies are rough approximations
rather than precise figures. Moreover, within a single society, individual regions often
had very different demographic experiences. Nevertheless, even for classical times,
the general outlines of population history are reasonably clear.
During the second and third centuries C.E., the Han and Roman empires suffered large-scale outbreaks of epidemic disease. The most destructive diseases were
probably smallpox and measles, and epidemics of bubonic plague may also have
erupted. All three diseases are devastating when they break out in populations without resistance, immunity, or medicines to combat them. As disease ravaged the two
empires, Chinese and Roman populations declined sharply.
During the reign of Augustus, the population of the Roman empire stood at about
sixty million people. During the second century C.E., epidemics reduced Roman population by about one-quarter, to forty-five million. Most devastating was an outbreak
of smallpox that spread throughout the Mediterranean basin during the years 165 to
180 C.E. The epidemic was especially virulent in cities, and it even claimed the life of
the Roman emperor Marcus Aurelius (180 C.E.). In combination with war and invasions, continuing outbreaks caused a significant population decline during the third
and fourth centuries: by 400 C.E. the number of Romans had fallen to perhaps forty
million. During the fifth and early sixth centuries, the Roman population stabilized,
but an epidemic of bubonic plague broke out in the mid-sixth century and caused a
general population decline throughout the Mediterranean region.
Epidemics appeared slightly later in China than in the Mediterranean region.
From fifty million people at the beginning of the millennium, Chinese population
rose to sixty million in 200 C.E. As diseases found their way east, however, Chinese
numbers fell back to fifty million by 400 C.E. and to forty-five million by 600 C.E.
Thus by 600 C.E. both Mediterranean and Chinese populations had fallen by a quarter to a third from their high points during classical times.
Demographic decline in turn brought economic and social change. Trade within
the empires declined, and both the Chinese and the Roman economies contracted.
Both economies also moved toward regional self-sufficiency: whereas previously the
Chinese and Roman states had integrated the various regions of their empires into a
larger network of trade and exchange, after about 200 C.E. they increasingly established several smaller regional economies that concentrated on their own needs instead of the larger imperial market. In the Roman empire, for example, the eastern
Mediterranean regions of Anatolia, Egypt, and Greece continued to form a larger, integrated society, but regional economies increasingly emerged in western Mediterranean lands, including Italy, Gaul, Spain, and northwest Africa.
The demographic histories of classical Persia, India, and other lands are not as clear
as they are for China and the Roman empire. Persia most likely experienced demographic, economic, and social problems similar to those that afflicted China and the
Mediterranean basin. India may well have suffered from epidemic disease and population losses, although there is limited evidence for those troubles in south Asia. In east
Asia and the Mediterranean basin, however, it is clear that epidemic disease seriously
weakened Chinese and Roman societies. Indeed, epidemic disease contributed to serious instability in China after the collapse of the Han dynasty, and in weakening Mediterranean society, it helped bring about the decline and fall of the western Roman empire.

ben06937.Ch12_286-312.qxd

8/27/07

8:17 AM

Page 301

CHAPTER 12 |

Cross-Cultural Exchanges on the Silk Roads

301

Sources from the Past
St. Cyprian on Epidemic Disease in the Roman Empire
St. Cyprian, bishop of Carthage, was an outspoken proponent of Christianity during the early and middle decades of
the third century C.E. When epidemic disease struck the Roman empire in 251 C.E., imperial authorities blamed the
outbreak on Christians who refused to honor pagan gods. Cyprian refuted that charge in his treatise On Mortality,
which described the symptoms of epidemic disease and reflected on its significance for the Christian community.
It serves as validation of the [Christian] faith when the
bowels loosen and drain the body’s strength, when fever
generated in bone marrow causes sores to break out in
the throat, when continuous vomiting roils the intestines, when blood-shot eyes burn, when the feet or other
bodily parts are amputated because of infection by putrefying disease, when through weakness caused by injuries to the body either mobility is impeded, or hearing
is impaired, or sight is obscured. It requires enormous
greatness of heart to struggle with resolute mind against
so many onslaughts of destruction and death. It requires
great loftiness to stand firm amidst the ruins of the
human race, not to concede defeat with those who have
no hope in God, but rather to rejoice and embrace the
gift of the times. With Christ as our judge, we should
receive this gift as the reward of his faith, as we vigorously affirm our faith and, having suffered, advance toward Christ by Christ’s narrow path. . . .
Many of us [Christians] are dying in this epidemic—
that is, many of us are being liberated from the world.
The epidemic is a pestilence for the Jews and the pagans
and the enemies of Christ, but for the servants of God it
is a welcome event. True, without any discrimination,
the just are dying alongside the unjust, but you should
not imagine that the evil and the good face a common
destruction. The just are called to refreshment, while the

unjust are herded off to punishment: the faithful receive
protection, while the faithless receive retribution. We are
unseeing and ungrateful for divine favors, beloved
brethren, and we do not recognize what is granted to
us. . . .
How suitable and essential it is that this plague and
pestilence, which seems so terrible and ferocious, probes
the justice of every individual and examines the minds
of the human race to determine whether the healthy care
for the ill, whether relatives diligently love their kin,
whether masters show mercy to their languishing slaves,
whether physicians do not abandon those seeking their
aid, whether the ferocious diminish their violence,
whether the greedy in the fear of death extinguish the
raging flames of their insatiable avarice, whether the
proud bend their necks, whether the shameless mitigate
their audacity, whether the rich will loosen their purse
strings and give something to others as their loved ones
perish all around them and as they are about to die without heirs.
FOR FURTHER REFLECTION

To what extent do you think St. Cyprian was effective in
his efforts to bring inherited Christian teachings to bear
on the unprecedented conditions he and his followers
faced?

SOURCE:

Wilhelm von Hartel, ed. S. Thasci Caecili Cypriani opera omnia in Corpus scriptorum
ecclesiasticorum latinorum. Vienna: 1868, vol. 3, pp. 305–6. (Translation by Jerry H. Bentley.)

China after the Han Dynasty
By the time epidemic diseases struck China, internal political problems had already
begun to weaken the Han dynasty. By the late second century C.E., Han authorities
had largely lost their ability to maintain order. Early in the third century C.E., the
central government dissolved, and a series of autonomous regional kingdoms took
the place of the Han state. With the disappearance of the Han dynasty, China experienced significant cultural change, most notably an increasing interest in Buddhism.

ben06937.Ch12_286-312.qxd

302

PART II |

8/27/07

8:17 AM

Page 302

The Formation of Classical Societies, 500 B.C.E. to 500 C.E.

G O B I D E S E RT

Sea
of
J apan

w
Yello

(H

ng
ua

He

)

Ye l l o w
Sea

Luoyang

Jianye
(Nanjing)
Chengdu

n gzi
Ya

(Ch

ang

Jia

n
g)

East
China
Sea

Wei
Wu

South China Sea
0

Shu

0

500 mi

250
500

1000 km

Map 12.3 China after the Han dynasty, 220 C.E. Compare this map with Map 8.2 showing the Han empire at its height.
What geographical considerations might help explain why the Han empire broke up into the three kingdoms shown here?

Internal Decay of the Han State
The Han dynasty collapsed largely because of internal problems that its rulers could
not solve. One problem involved the development of factions within the ranks of the
ruling elites. Marriage alliances between imperial and aristocratic families led to the formation of many factions whose members sought to advance their prospects in the imperial government and exclude others from important positions. That atmosphere
led to constant infighting and backstabbing among the ruling elites, which in turn
reduced the effectiveness of the central government.
An even more difficult problem had to do with the perennial issue of land and its
equitable distribution. At the turn of the millennium, the usurper Wang Mang had
attempted to redistribute land in China, but his program did not survive his brief
reign (9–23 C.E.). During the last two centuries of the Han dynasty, large landowners gained new influence in the government. They managed to reduce their share of
taxes and shift the burden onto peasants. They even formed private armies to advance their class interests.

ben06937.Ch12_286-312.qxd

8/27/07

8:17 AM

Page 303

CHAPTER 12 |

Cross-Cultural Exchanges on the Silk Roads

Those developments provoked
widespread unrest, particularly among
peasants, who found themselves under increasing economic pressure with
no means to influence the government. Pressures became particularly
acute during the late second and third
centuries when epidemics began to
take their toll. In 184 C.E. peasant discontent fueled an immense uprising
known as the Yellow Turban rebellion, so called because the rebels wore
yellow headbands that represented
the color of the Chinese earth and
After the collapse of the Han dynasty, China
symbolized their peasant origins. Alexperienced social and economic difficulty.
though quickly suppressed, the rebelWealthy classes often traveled in ox carts
lion proved to be only the first in a
instead of more expensive, horse-drawn
series of insurrections that plagued the
carriages. Archaeologists found this ceramic
late Han dynasty.
model of an ox cart in a tomb from the sixth
century C.E.
Meanwhile, Han generals increasingly usurped political authority. By
190 C.E. the Han emperor had become a mere puppet, and the generals effectively ruled
the regions controlled by their armies. They allied with wealthy landowners of their regions and established themselves as warlords who maintained a kind of rough order
based on force of arms. The generals continued to recognize an emperor for a short
time, but in 220 C.E. they formally abolished the Han dynasty and divided the empire
into three large kingdoms.
Once the dynasty had disappeared, large numbers of nomadic peoples migrated
into China, especially the northern regions, and they helped to keep China disunited
for more than 350 years. Between the fourth and sixth centuries C.E., nomadic peoples established large kingdoms that dominated much of northern China as well as
the steppe lands.

Peasant Rebellion

Collapse of
the Han Dynasty

Cultural Change in Post-Han China
In some ways the centuries following the fall of the Han dynasty present a spectacle of
chaos and disorder. One kingdom toppled another, only to fall in its turn to a temporary successor. War and nomadic invasions led to population decline in much of northern China. By the mid-fifth century, the region around Chang’an and Luoyang—the
heartland of classical China—had experienced almost complete devastation because of
armies that ravaged the region in search of food and plunder. Contemporaries reported
that the Former Han capital of Chang’an had no more than one hundred households
and that the Later Han capital of Luoyang resembled a trash heap more than a city.
Beneath the disorderly surface of political events, however, several important social
and cultural changes were taking place. First, nomadic peoples increasingly adapted to
the Chinese environment. They took up agriculture and built permanent settlements.
They married Chinese spouses and took Chinese names. They wore the clothes, ate
the food, and adopted the customs of China. Some sought a formal Chinese education
and became well versed in Chinese philosophy and literature. In short, nomadic peoples became increasingly sinicized, and as the generations passed, distinctions between
peoples of nomadic and Chinese ancestry became less and less obvious. Partly because

303

Sinicization of
Nomadic Peoples

ben06937.Ch12_286-312.qxd

304

PART II |

Popularity
of Buddhism

8/27/07

8:17 AM

Page 304

The Formation of Classical Societies, 500 B.C.E. to 500 C.E.

of that development, a new imperial dynasty was eventually able to reconstitute a centralized imperial state in north China.
Second, with the disintegration of political order, the Confucian tradition lost
much of its credibility. The original goal of Confucius and his early followers was to
find some means to move from chaos to stability during the Period of the Warring
States. As long as Confucian methods and principles helped to maintain order, ruling
elites and intellectual classes honored the Confucian tradition. When the Han dynasty collapsed, Confucianism seemed irrelevant.
Individuals who in earlier centuries might have committed themselves to Confucian values turned instead to Daoism and Buddhism. As in the Period of the Warring
States, Daoism once again offered a way to find peace in a turbulent world. Originally, Daoism was a school of speculative philosophical thought that appealed mostly
to an educated elite. After the fall of the Han, however, it became more a religious
than a philosophical doctrine. Daoist sages not only promised salvation to those who
observed their doctrines and rituals but also experimented with spices, herbs, and
drugs to concoct elixirs or potions that supposedly conferred health and immortality.
Daoism attracted widespread interest among a population afflicted by war and disease and became much more popular than before, especially because it faced less
competition from the Confucian tradition.
Even more important than Daoism for Chinese cultural history was Buddhism.
Until about the fourth century C.E., Buddhism was largely the faith of foreign merchants in China and attracted little interest on the part of native Chinese. After the fall
of the Han empire, however, Buddhism received strong support from nomadic peoples
who migrated into northern China and who in many cases had long been familiar with
Buddhism in central Asia. Meanwhile, as a result of missionary efforts, the Indian
faith began to attract a following among native Chinese as well. Indeed, between the
fourth and sixth centuries C.E., Buddhism became well established in China. When a
centralized imperial state took shape in the late sixth century C.E., Buddhism provided
an important cultural foundation for the restoration of a unified political order.

The Fall of the Roman Empire
Moralists have often interpreted the fall of the Roman empire as a symbol of the transitory nature of human creations. Fascination with imperial Rome has encouraged the
proliferation of theories—many of them quite silly—seeking to explain the fall of the
empire as the result of some single, simple cause. By various accounts, the Roman
empire declined and fell because of lead poisoning, radiation given off by bricks, immorality, or the rise of Christianity. Notwithstanding the zeal with which proponents
have promoted pet theories, there was no single cause for the decline and fall of the
Roman empire. Instead, a combination of internal problems and external pressures
weakened the empire and brought an end to Roman authority in the western portion
of the empire, whereas imperial rule continued until the fifteenth century C.E. in the
eastern Mediterranean. In the Mediterranean basin as in China, imperial weakness
and collapse coincided with significant cultural change, notably the increasing popularity of Christianity.

Internal Decay in the Roman Empire
The Barracks
Emperors

As in the case of the Han dynasty, internal political problems go a long way toward
explaining the fall of the Roman empire. Like their Han counterparts, the Roman

ben06937.Ch12_286-312.qxd

8/27/07

8:17 AM

Page 305

CHAPTER 12 |

Cross-Cultural Exchanges on the Silk Roads

emperors faced internal opposition.
During the half century from 235 to
284 C.E., there were no fewer than
twenty-six claimants to the imperial
throne. Called the “barracks emperors,” most of them were generals
who seized power, held it briefly, and
then suddenly lost it when they were
displaced by rivals or by their mutinous troops. Not surprisingly, most
of the barracks emperors died violently: only one is known for sure to
have succumbed to natural causes.
Apart from divisions and factions,
the Roman empire faced problems
because of its sheer size. Even during
the best of times, when the emperors
could count on abundant revenues
and disciplined armed forces, the
sprawling empire posed a challenge
for central governors. After the third
century, as epidemics spread throughout the empire and its various regions
moved toward local, self-sufficient
economies, the empire as a whole became increasingly unmanageable.
Sculpture of the tetrarchs, or four corulers of
The emperor Diocletian (reigned
the Roman empire, during the late third century
284–305 C.E.) attempted to deal
C.E.; from left, Galerius, Constantius, Diocletian,
with this problem by dividing the
and Maximian.
empire into two administrative districts. The eastern district included
the wealthy lands of Anatolia, Syria, Egypt, and Greece, and the western district embraced Italy, Gaul, Spain, Britain, and north Africa. A coemperor ruled each district
with the aid of a powerful lieutenant, and Diocletian hoped the four officials, known
as the tetrarchs, would be able to administer the vast empire more effectively than an
individual emperor could. Diocletian was a skillful administrator. He managed to
bring Rome’s many armies, including unpredictable maverick forces, under firm imperial control. He also tried to deal with a crumbling economy by strengthening the
imperial currency, forcing the government to adjust its expenditures to its income,
and imposing price caps to dampen inflation. His economic measures were less successful than his administrative reforms, but they helped stabilize an economy ravaged
by half a century of civil unrest.
Yet Diocletian’s reforms also encouraged ambition among the four top corulers and
their generals, and his retirement from the imperial office in 305 C.E. set off a round of
internal struggles and bitter civil war. Already in 306 C.E. Constantine, son of Diocletian’s coruler Constantius, moved to stake his claim as sole emperor. By 313 C.E. he had
defeated most of his enemies, although he overcame his last rivals only in 324 C.E. Once
he had consolidated his grip on power, Constantine ordered the construction of a new
capital city, Constantinople, at a strategic site overlooking the Bosporus, the strait linking the Black Sea to the Sea of Marmara and beyond to the wealthy eastern Mediterranean. After 330 C.E. Constantinople became the capital of a united Roman empire.

Diocletian

Constantine

305

ben06937.Ch12_286-312.qxd

306

PART II |

8/27/07

8:17 AM

Page 306

The Formation of Classical Societies, 500 B.C.E. to 500 C.E.

Constantine was an able emperor. With the reunion of the eastern and western
districts of the empire, however, he and his successors faced the same sort of administrative difficulties that Diocletian had attempted to solve by dividing the empire. As
population declined and the economy contracted, emperors found it increasingly difficult to marshal the resources needed to govern and protect the vast Roman empire.
The need for protection against external threats became especially acute during the
late fourth and early fifth centuries C.E.

Germanic Invasions and the Fall
of the Western Roman Empire

Germanic Migrations

The Huns

Collapse of the
Western Roman
Empire

Apart from internal problems, the Roman empire also faced several formidable military threats. One arose on the empire’s southeastern frontiers when the Sasanid dynasty toppled the Parthians in 224 C.E. and established a powerful state in Iran. Sasanid
and Roman forces clashed repeatedly in Anatolia, Syria, and Mesopotamia as each side
sought to consolidate its authority in border regions. Some of the conflicts dealt devastating blows. In the year 260 C.E., the Roman emperor Valerian fell captive to Sasanid
forces. He spent his last few years at the Sasanid court in Ctesiphon, where his captors
forced him to stoop and serve as a mounting stool when the Sasanid king wanted to
ride his horse. (After his death, the Sasanids preserved Valerian’s skin as a memento of
their victory over the Romans.) Romans and Sasanids engaged in intermittent hostilities until the sixth century C.E., but a series of buffer states between the two empires
reduced the intensity of conflict after the third century.
Migratory Germanic peoples posed a more immediate and serious military threat
to the Roman empire. Indeed, during the fifth century C.E., Germanic invasions
brought an end to Roman authority in the western half of the empire, although imperial rule survived for an additional millennium in the eastern Mediterranean.
Germanic peoples had migrated from their homelands in northern Europe and
lived on the eastern and northern borders of the Roman empire since the second century C.E. Most notable were the Visigoths, who came originally from Scandinavia and
Russia. Like the nomadic peoples who moved into northern China after the fall of the
Han dynasty, the Visigoths settled, adopted agriculture, and drew deep inspiration
from Roman society. They adapted Roman law to the needs of their society, for example, converted to Christianity, and translated the Bible into the Visigothic language.
They also contributed large numbers of soldiers to the Roman armies. In the interests
of social order, however, the Romans discouraged settlement of the Visigoths and
other Germanic peoples within the empire, preferring that they constitute buffer societies outside imperial borders.
During the late fourth century, the relationship between Visigoths and Romans
changed dramatically when the nomadic Huns began an aggressive westward migration from their homeland in central Asia. The Huns spoke a Turkish language, and
they probably were cousins of the nomadic Xiongnu who inhabited the central Asian
steppe lands west of China. During the mid-fifth century C.E., the warrior-king Attila
organized the Huns into a virtually unstoppable military juggernaut. Under Attila,
the Huns invaded Hungary, probed Roman frontiers in the Balkan region, menaced
Gaul and northern Italy, and attacked Germanic peoples living on the borders of the
Roman empire.
Attila did not create a set of political institutions or a state structure, and the
Huns disappeared as a political and military force soon after his death in 453 C.E. By
that time, however, the Huns had placed such pressure on Visigoths, Ostrogoths,
Vandals, Franks, and other Germanic peoples that they streamed en masse into the
Roman empire in search of refuge. Once inside imperial boundaries, they encoun-

ben06937.Ch12_286-312.qxd

8/27/07

8:17 AM

Page 307

CHAPTER 12 |

SC AN
DI
NA
V

IA

N o r t h Se a

Ba

B R I TA I N

i
lt

c

Se

a

RUSSIA

Od er

IRELAND

Cross-Cultural Exchanges on the Silk Roads

R hine

Dn
u be
Da n

ATL AN TI C
OCEAN

iep

er

GAUL
H U NGARY

A

dr

IT AL Y
CORSICA

ia

Rome

ti

c

B l ac k S ea

BALKANS

Se

a

SP AIN

Constantinople
SARDINIA

Hippo

GREECE
A N AT O L I A

SICILY

Carthage
AFRICA

SYRIA
CRETE

CYPRUS

Med i t erran ean S ea

Huns

Lombards

Visigoths

Angles and Saxons

Ostrogoths
Vandals

Western empire

EGYPT
Ni l e

Franks

Eastern empire

Red
Sea

Map 12.4 Germanic invasions and the fall of the western Roman empire, 450–476 C.E. Many different groups invaded
the Roman empire following many different routes. Why did the Germanic invasions concentrate on the western Roman empire?

tered little effective resistance and moved around almost at will. They established
settlements throughout the western half of the empire—Italy, Gaul, Spain, Britain,
and north Africa—where populations were less dense than in the eastern Mediterranean. Under the command of Alaric, the Visigoths even stormed and sacked Rome
in 410 C.E. By the middle of the fifth century, the western part of the Roman empire
was in shambles. In 476 C.E. imperial authority came to an ignominious end when
the Germanic general Odovacer deposed Romulus Augustulus, the last of the Roman
emperors in the western half of the empire.
Unlike the Han dynasty, the Roman empire did not entirely disintegrate: imperial
authority survived for another millennium in the eastern half of the empire, known
after the fifth century C.E. as the Byzantine empire. In the western half, however,
Roman authority dissolved, and nomadic peoples built successor states in regions
formerly subject to Rome. Vandals and then Visigoths governed Spain, Franks ruled
Gaul, Angles and Saxons invaded Britain, and Italy fell under the sway of a variety of
peoples, including Visigoths, Vandals, and Lombards.

307

ben06937.Ch12_286-312.qxd

308

PART II |

8/27/07

8:17 AM

Page 308

The Formation of Classical Societies, 500 B.C.E. to 500 C.E.

In this relief sculpture carved in the
second century C.E., a Roman soldier
battles Germanic forces along the
Danube river.

Cultural Change in the Late Roman Empire

Prominence
of Christianity

In the Roman empire, as in China, the collapse of the imperial state coincided with
important social and cultural changes. The Germanic peoples who toppled the empire
looked to their own traditions for purposes of organizing society and government.
When they settled in the regions of the former empire, however, they absorbed a good
deal of Roman influence. They adapted Roman law to their needs, for example, thus
preserving one of the most important features of Roman society. Over time, the mingling of Roman and Germanic traditions led to the emergence of an altogether new
society—medieval Europe.
Christianity was perhaps the most prominent survivor of the western Roman empire. During the fourth century C.E., several developments enhanced its influence
throughout the Mediterranean basin. In the first place, Christianity won recognition as
a legitimate religion in the Roman empire. In 312 C.E., while seeking to establish himself as sole Roman emperor, Constantine experienced a vision that impressed on him
the power of the Christian God. He believed that the Christian God helped him to prevail over his rivals, and in 313 he promulgated the Edict of Milan, which allowed Christians to practice their faith openly in the Roman empire. At some point during his reign,
perhaps after his edict, Constantine converted to Christianity, and in 380 C.E. the emperor Theodosius proclaimed Christianity the official religion of the Roman empire. By

ben06937.Ch12_286-312.qxd

8/27/07

8:17 AM

Page 309

CHAPTER 12 |

Cross-Cultural Exchanges on the Silk Roads

the mid-fourth century, Christians
held important political and military
positions, and imperial sponsorship
helped their faith to attract more converts than ever before.
Christianity also began to attract
thoughtful and talented converts who
articulated a Christian message for the
intellectual elites of the Roman empire. The earliest Christians had come
largely from the ranks of ordinary
working people, and their doctrine
struck philosophers and the educated
elites as both unsophisticated and unbelievable. During its first three centuries, the new faith grew as a popular
religion of salvation favored by the
masses, rather than as a reasoned doctrine of intellectual substance. During
the fourth century, however, intellectual elites began to take more interest
in Christianity.
The most important and influenOnly the colossal head of Constantine survives
tial of these figures was St. Augustine
from a statue that originally stood about
(354– 430 C.E.), bishop of the north
14 meters (46 feet) tall.
African city of Hippo (modern-day
Annaba in Algeria). Augustine had a
fine education, and he was conversant with the leading intellectual currents of the day.
During his youth he drew great inspiration from Stoicism and Platonism, and for nine
years he belonged to a community of Manichaeans. Eventually he became disillusioned
with both Hellenistic philosophy and Manichaeism, and in 387 C.E., while studying in
Italy, he converted to Christianity. For the remainder of his life he worked to reconcile
Christianity with Greek and Roman philosophical traditions, especially Platonism, and
to articulate Christianity in terms that were familiar and persuasive to the educated
classes. More than any others, Augustine’s writings made Christianity an intellectually
respectable alternative to Hellenistic philosophy and popular religions of salvation.
Besides winning the right to practice their faith openly and attracting intellectual
talent, Christian leaders constructed an institutional apparatus that transformed a
popular religion of salvation into a powerful church. In the absence of recognized
leadership, the earliest Christians generated a range of conflicting and sometimes
contradictory doctrines. Some taught that Jesus was a mortal human being, others
that he was a god, and yet others that he was both human and divine. Some allowed
women to serve as priests and attributed great powers to Jesus’ mother, Mary, and
others restricted church offices to men and conceived of Christian deities as males.
Early Christians might well have continued to express their understandings of their
faith in individual ways. During the third and fourth centuries, however, as the Roman
empire experienced political turmoil and underwent administrative changes, some
church leaders sought doctrinal stability and worked to define essential tenets that all
Christians must accept. As Christians became more prominent in the Roman empire,
state authorities also promoted efforts to standardize teachings. Emperor Constantine
himself pushed for a clear statement of Christian doctrine that he hoped would create a
foundation for cultural unity in the Roman empire.

309

St. Augustine

The New Testament
and the Emergence of
Orthodox Christianity

ben06937.Ch12_286-312.qxd

310

PART II |

8/27/07

8:17 AM

Page 310

The Formation of Classical Societies, 500 B.C.E. to 500 C.E.

The Institutional
Church

patriarch (PAY-tree-ahrk)

In search of clearly defined doctrine,
church leaders conducted intense debates
about the quality and authority of the numerous writings that the earliest Christians
had generated expressing their understandings of their newly adopted faith. Those
writings, which numbered in the scores or
perhaps even hundreds, included gospels
that told the story of Jesus’ life, epistles that
outlined the authors’ views of moral and religious issues, and historical accounts that
offered interpretations of early Christian experiences from different perspectives. By
the late fourth century, church leaders were
reaching consensus that twenty-seven short
writings were more authoritative than the
others, and they recognized these writings
as canonical scriptures known later as the
New Testament. By adopting a small number of writings as canonical, church leaders
rejected many others as misguided, untruthful, or even heretical. As a result, they
profoundly influenced the development of
Portrait of St. Augustine holding a copy
doctrine that most Christian authorities
of his most famous work, The City of God,
eventually came to recognize as the orthowhich sought to explain the meaning of
dox or correct teaching.
history and the world from a Christian
To standardize their faith, Christian
point of view.
leaders also instituted a hierarchy of church
officials. At the top were five religious authorities—the bishop of Rome and the patriarchs of Jerusalem, Antioch, Alexandria,
and Constantinople—who resided in the most important spiritual and political centers
of the Roman empire. These five authorities wielded roughly equal influence in the
larger Christian community, although the bishop of Rome enjoyed somewhat greater
prestige than the others. (His enhanced status derived both from his claim to be the
spiritual descendant of Jesus’ chief disciple, St. Peter, and from the fact that he had his
seat at Rome, the original imperial capital.)
Subordinate to the five principal authorities were bishops, who presided over religious affairs in their districts, known as dioceses, which included all the prominent
cities of the Roman empire. When theological disputes arose, the patriarchs and bishops assembled in church councils to determine which views would prevail as official
doctrine. The councils at Nicaea (325 C.E.) and Chalcedon (451 C.E.), for example,
took up the difficult and contentious issue of Jesus’ nature. Delegates at the councils
proclaimed that Jesus was both fully human and fully divine at the same time, in contrast to Nestorians, Arians, and other Christian groups who held that Jesus was either primarily human or primarily divine. The decisions and decrees of the church
councils did not put an end to all debate, nor did they prevent new divisions and
new grounds of contention from arising. Nevertheless, by defining the doctrines that
most church authorities regarded as orthodox, council delegates left enduring influences on the beliefs and values of Christianity.
As Roman imperial authority crumbled, the bishop of Rome, known as the pope
(from the Latin papa, meaning “father”), emerged as spiritual leader of Christian

ben06937.Ch12_286-312.qxd

8/27/07

8:17 AM

Page 311

CHAPTER 12 |

Cross-Cultural Exchanges on the Silk Roads

communities in the western regions of the empire. As the only sources of established
and recognized authority, the popes and the bishops of other important cities organized local government and defensive measures for their communities. They also
mounted missionary campaigns to convert Germanic peoples to Christianity. Although Roman imperial authority disappeared, Roman Christianity survived and
served as a foundation for cultural unity in lands that had formerly made up the western half of the Roman empire.

B

y 500 C.E. classical societies in Persia, China, India, and the Mediterranean basin had
either collapsed or fallen into decline. Yet all the classical societies left rich legacies

that shaped political institutions, social orders, and cultural traditions for centuries to
come. Moreover, by sponsoring commercial and cultural relations between different
peoples, the classical societies laid a foundation for intensive and systematic crosscultural interaction in later times. After the third century C.E., the decline of the Han and

Roman empires resulted in less activity over the silk roads than in the preceding three
hundred years. But the trade routes survived, and when a new series of imperial states
reestablished order throughout much of Eurasia and north Africa in the sixth century C.E.,
the peoples of the eastern hemisphere avidly resumed their crossing of cultural boundary lines in the interests of trade and communication.

C H R O N O L O G Y
3rd century B.C.E.

Spread of Buddhism and Hinduism to southeast Asia

2nd century B.C.E.

Introduction of Buddhism to central Asia

139–126 B.C.E.

Travels of Zhang Qian in central Asia

1st century B.C.E.

Introduction of Buddhism to China

2nd century C.E.

Spread of Christianity in the Mediterranean basin and southwest Asia

184 C.E.

Yellow Turban rebellion

216–272 C.E.

Life of Mani

220 C.E.

Collapse of the Han dynasty

284–305 C.E.

Reign of Diocletian

313–337 C.E.

Reign of Constantine

313 C.E.

Edict of Milan and the legalization of Christianity in the Roman empire

325 C.E.

Council of Nicaea

451 C.E.

Council of Chalcedon

476 C.E.

Collapse of the western Roman empire

311

ben06937.Ch12_286-312.qxd

312
F O R

PART II |

8/27/07

8:17 AM

Page 312

The Formation of Classical Societies, 500 B.C.E. to 500 C.E.

F U R T H E R

R E A D I N G

Thomas J. Barfield. The Perilous Frontier: Nomadic Empires and
China. Cambridge, Mass., 1989. Provocative study of the
Xiongnu and other central Asian peoples.
Jerry H. Bentley. Old World Encounters: Cross-Cultural Contacts
and Exchanges in Pre-Modern Times. New York, 1993. Studies
the spread of cultural and religious traditions before 1500 C.E.
Luce Boulnois. The Silk Road. Trans. by D. Chamberlain. New
York, 1966. Popular account of trade and travel over the
silk roads.
Peter Brown. The Making of Late Antiquity. Cambridge, Mass.,
1978. Brilliant and evocative analysis of the cultural and religious history of the late Roman empire.
———. The World of Late Antiquity, A.D. 150–750. London,
1971. Well-illustrated essay concentrating on social and cultural themes.
Averil Cameron. The Later Roman Empire, A.D. 284– 430. Cambridge, Mass., 1993. A lively synthesis.
———. The Mediterranean World in Late Antiquity, A.D. 395–600.
London, 1993. Like its companion volume just cited, a wellinformed synthesis.
Philip D. Curtin. Cross-Cultural Trade in World History. New
York, 1984. A synthetic work that concentrates on merchant
communities in distant lands and their roles in facilitating
cross-cultural trade.
Edward Gibbon. The Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire. Many
editions available. A classic account, still well worth reading,
by a masterful historical stylist of the eighteenth century.
C. D. Gordon, ed. The Age of Attila: Fifth-Century Byzantium
and the Barbarians. Ann Arbor, 1972. Translations of pri-

mary sources on the society and history of nomadic and migratory peoples.
A. H. M. Jones. The Decline of the Ancient World. New York,
1966. Synthetic study of the Roman empire in decline by a
foremost scholar of the subject.
J. Innes Miller. The Spice Trade of the Roman Empire, 29 B.C. to
A . D . 641. Oxford, 1969. Scholarly study of long-distance
trade during classical times.
Samuel Hugh Moffett. A History of Christianity in Asia, vol. 1.
San Francisco, 1992. An important volume that surveys the
spread of early Christianity east of the Roman empire.
Elaine Pagels. Beyond Belief: The Secret Gospel of Thomas. New
York, 2003. Discusses the emergence of orthodox Christianity and the recognition of the New Testament as a body of
canonical writings.
Joseph A. Tainter. The Collapse of Complex Societies. Cambridge,
1988. Scholarly review of theories and evidence bearing on
the fall of empires and societies.
Mortimer Wheeler. Flames over Persepolis. New York, 1968. Wellillustrated volume dealing with the interactions of Greek,
Persian, and Indian peoples during the Hellenistic era.
Susan Whitfield. Life along the Silk Road. Berkeley, 1999. Focuses
on the experiences of ten individuals who lived or traveled
along the silk roads.
Francis Wood. The Silk Road: Two Thousand Years in the Heart of
Asia. Berkeley, 2002. A brilliantly illustrated volume discussing the history of the silk roads from antiquity to the
twentieth century.


