Islam

Page 344

The Expansive
Realm of Islam

ben06937.Ch14_344-373.qxd

8/27/07

8:19 AM

Page 345

A Prophet and His World
Muhammad and His Message
Muhammad’s Migration to Medina
The Establishment of Islam in Arabia

Economy and Society
of the Early Islamic World

The Expansion of Islam

New Crops, Agricultural Experimentation,
and Urban Growth
The Formation of a Hemispheric Trading Zone
The Changing Status of Women

The Early Caliphs and the Umayyad Dynasty
The Abbasid Dynasty

Islamic Values and Cultural Exchanges
The Formation of an Islamic Cultural Tradition
Islam and the Cultural Traditions of Persia, India,
and Greece

In 632 C.E. the prophet Muhammad visited his native city of Mecca from his home in exile at
Medina, and in doing so he set an example that devout Muslims have sought to emulate ever
since. The hajj—the holy pilgrimage to Mecca—draws Muslims by the hundreds of thousands
from all parts of the world to Saudi Arabia. Each year Muslims travel to Mecca by land, sea,
and air to make the pilgrimage and visit the holy sites of Islam.
In centuries past the numbers of pilgrims were smaller, but their observance of the hajj
was no less conscientious. By the ninth century, pilgrimage had become so popular that Muslim rulers went to some lengths to meet the needs of travelers passing through their lands.
With the approach of the pilgrimage season—the last month of the Islamic lunar calendar—
crowds gathered at major trading centers such as Baghdad, Damascus, and Cairo. There they
lived in tent cities, surviving on food and water provided by government officials, until they
could join caravans bound for Mecca. Muslim rulers invested considerable sums in the maintenance of roads, wells, cisterns, and lodgings that accommodated pilgrims—as well as castles
and police forces that protected travelers—on their journeys to Mecca and back.
The hajj was not only solemn observance but also an occasion for joy and celebration.
Muslim rulers and wealthy pilgrims often made lavish gifts to caravan companions and others
they met en route to Mecca. During her famous hajj of 976–977, for example, the Mesopotamian princess Jamila bint Nasir al-Dawla provided food and fresh green vegetables for her fellow pilgrims and furnished five hundred camels for handicapped travelers. She also purchased
freedom for five hundred slaves and distributed fifty thousand fine robes among the common
people of Mecca.
Most pilgrims did not have the resources to match Jamila’s generosity, but for common
travelers, too, the hajj became a special occasion. Merchants and craftsmen made acquaintances and arranged business deals with pilgrims from other lands. Students and scholars exchanged ideas during their weeks of traveling together. For all pilgrims, participation in ritual
activities lent new meaning and significance to their faith.
The word Islam means “submission,” signifying obedience to the rule and will of Allah, the
only deity recognized in the strictly monotheistic Islamic religion. An individual who accepts
the Islamic faith is a Muslim, meaning “one who has submitted.” Though it began as one man’s
expression of unqualified faith in Allah, Islam quickly attracted followers and took on political
and social as well as religious significance. During the first century of the new faith’s existence,
Islam reached far beyond its Arabian homeland, bringing Sasanid Persia and parts of the
Byzantine empire into its orbit. By the eighth century the realm of Islam and the Byzantine empire stood as political and economic anchors of the postclassical world.
OPPOSITE:

A sixteenth-century Turkish manuscript depicts pilgrims praying
at Mecca in the mosque surrounding the Ka’ba.

345

ben06937.Ch14_344-373.qxd

346

PART III |

8/27/07

8:19 AM

Page 346

The Postclassical Era, 500 to 1000 C.E.
Early Islamic religious beliefs reflected the deep influence of Jewish and Christian faiths,
while early Muslim society reflected the nomadic and mercantile Arabian society from which
Islam arose. Over time, Muslims also drew inspiration from other societies and other cultural
traditions. After toppling the Sasanid dynasty, Muslim conquerors adopted Persian techniques
of government and finance to administer their lands. Persian literature, science, and religious
values also found a place in Islamic society. During later centuries Muslims drew inspiration
from Greek and Indian traditions as well. Thus Muslims did not invent a new Islamic society
but, rather, fashioned it by blending elements from Arab, Persian, Greek, and Indian societies.
While drawing influence from other societies, however, the Islamic faith thoroughly transformed the cultural traditions that it absorbed. The expansive realm of Islam eventually provided a political framework for trade and diplomacy over a vast portion of the eastern
hemisphere, from west Africa to the islands of southeast Asia. Many lands of varied cultural
background thus became part of a larger society often called the dar al-Islam—an Arabic term
that means the “house of Islam” and that refers to lands under Islamic rule.

A Prophet and His World
Islam arose in the Arabian peninsula, and the new religion faithfully reflected the social and cultural conditions of its homeland. Desert covers most of the peninsula,
and agriculture is possible only in the well-watered area of Yemen in the south and in
a few other places, such as the city of Medina, where oases provide water. Yet human
communities have occupied Arabia for millennia. Nomadic peoples known as
bedouin kept herds of sheep, goats, and camels, migrating through the deserts to
find grass and water for their animals. The bedouin organized themselves in family
and clan groups. Individuals and their immediate families depended heavily on their
larger kinship networks for support in times of need. In an environment as harsh and
unforgiving as the Arabian desert, cooperation with kin often made the difference
between death and survival. Bedouin peoples developed a strong sense of loyalty to
their clans and guarded their common interests with determination. Clan identities
and loyalties survived for centuries after the appearance of Islam.
Arabia also figured prominently in the long-distance trade networks of the postclassical era. Commodities arrived at ports on the Persian Gulf (near modern Bahrain), the Arabian Sea (near modern Aden), and the Red Sea (near Mecca) and then
traveled overland by camel caravan to Palmyra or Damascus, which offered access to
the Mediterranean basin. After the third century C.E., Arabia became an increasingly
important link in trade between China and India in the east and Persia and Byzantium in the west. With the weakening of classical empires, trade routes across central
Asia had become insecure. Merchants abandoned the overland routes in favor of sealanes connecting with land routes in the Arabian peninsula. Trade passing across the
peninsula was especially important for the city of Mecca, which became an important
site of fairs and a stopping point for caravan traffic.

Muhammad and His Message
Muhammad’s
Early Life

The prophet Muhammad came into this world of nomadic bedouin herders and merchants. Born about 570 C.E. into a reputable family of merchants in Mecca, Muhammad ibn Abdullah lost both of his parents by the time he was six years old. His
grandfather and uncle cared for him and provided him with an education, but Muhammad’s early life was difficult. As a young man, he worked for a woman named Khadija,
a wealthy widow whom he married about 595 C.E. Through this marriage he gained a

ben06937.Ch14_344-373.qxd

8/27/07

8:19 AM

Page 347

CHAPTER 14 |

The Expansive Realm of Islam

347

Some northern Arabs went to great
lengths to demonstrate their devotion to
Christianity. This structure, carved out of
sheer rock along the wall of a ravine at
Petra in modern-day Jordan, served as
a monastery.

position of some prominence in Meccan society, although he did not by any means
enter the ranks of the elite.
By age thirty Muhammad had established himself as a merchant. He made a comfortable life for himself in Arabian society, where peoples of different religious and
cultural traditions regularly dealt with one another. Most Arabs recognized many
gods, goddesses, demons, and nature spirits whose favor they sought through prayers
and sacrifices. Large communities of Jewish merchants also worked throughout Arabia, and, especially in the north, many Arabs had converted to Christianity by Muhammad’s time. Although he was not deeply knowledgeable about Judaism or
Christianity, Muhammad had a basic understanding of both faiths. He may even have
traveled by caravan to Syria, where he would certainly have dealt with Jewish and
Christian merchants.

ben06937.Ch14_344-373.qxd

348

PART III |

Muhammad’s
Spiritual
Transformation

The Quran

8/27/07

8:19 AM

Page 348

The Postclassical Era, 500 to 1000 C.E.

About 610 C.E., as he approached age forty, Muhammad underwent a profound
spiritual experience that transformed his life and left a deep mark on world history.
His experience left him with the convictions that in all the world there was only one
true deity, Allah (“God”), that he ruled the universe, that idolatry and the recognition of other gods amounted to wickedness, and that Allah would soon bring his
judgment on the world, rewarding the righteous and punishing the wicked. Muhammad experienced visions, which he understood as messages or revelations from Allah,
delivered through the archangel Gabriel (also recognized by Jews and Christians as a
special messenger of God), instructing him to explain his faith to others. He did not
set out to construct a new religion by combining elements of Arab, Jewish, and
Christian beliefs. In light of his cultural context, however, it is not surprising that he
shared numerous specific beliefs with Jews and Christians—and indeed also with
Zoroastrians, whose views had profoundly influenced the development of both Judaism and Christianity. In any case, in accordance with instructions transmitted to
him by Gabriel, Muhammad began to expound his faith to his family and close
friends. Gradually, others showed interest in his message, and by about 620 C.E. a
zealous and expanding minority of Mecca’s citizenry had joined his circle.
Muhammad originally presented oral recitations of the revelations he received
during his visions. As the Islamic community grew, his followers prepared written
texts of his teachings. During the early 650s devout Muslims compiled these written
versions of Muhammad’s revelations and issued them as the Quran (“recitation”), the
holy book of Islam. A work of magnificent poetry, the Quran communicates in powerful and moving terms Muhammad’s understanding of Allah and his relation to the
world, and it serves as the definitive authority for Islamic religious doctrine and social
organization.
Apart from the Quran, several other sources have provided moral and religious
guidance for the Islamic community. Most important after the Quran are traditions
known as hadith, which include sayings attributed to Muhammad and accounts of the
prophet’s deeds. Several collections of hadith appeared between the ninth and eleventh
centuries C.E., and Muslim scholars have often taken them as guides for interpretation
of the Quran. Regarded as less authoritative than the Quran and the hadith, but still
important as inspirations for Islamic thought, were various additional early works describing social and legal customs, biographies of Muhammad, and pious commentaries
on the Quran.

Muhammad’s Migration to Medina
Conflict at Mecca

Quran (koo-RAHN)
Ka’ba (KAH-buh)

The growing popularity of Muhammad’s preaching brought him into conflict with the
ruling elites at Mecca. Conflict centered on religious issues. Muhammad’s insistence
that Allah was the only divine power in the universe struck many polytheistic Arabs as
offensive and dangerous as well, since it disparaged long-recognized deities and spirits
thought to wield influence over human affairs. The tensions also had a personal dimension. Mecca’s ruling elites, who were also the city’s wealthiest merchants, took it
as a personal affront and a threat to their position when Muhammad denounced greed
as moral wickedness that Allah would punish.
Muhammad’s attack on idolatry also represented an economic threat to those
who owned and profited from the many shrines to deities that attracted merchants
and pilgrims to Mecca. The best known of those shrines was a large black rock long
considered to be the dwelling of a powerful deity. Housed in a cube-shaped building
known as the Ka’ba, it drew worshipers from all over Arabia and brought considerable wealth to Mecca. As Muhammad relentlessly condemned the idolatry officially

ben06937.Ch14_344-373.qxd

8/27/07

8:19 AM

Page 349

CHAPTER 14 |

The Expansive Realm of Islam

Current Islamic doctrine forbids artistic representations of Muhammad and Allah to prevent
the worship of their images as idols. Although artists of previous centuries occasionally
produced paintings of Muhammad, Islamic art has emphasized geometric design and
calligraphy. This handsome page from a Quran written on vellum dates from the ninth or
early tenth century.

promoted at the Ka’ba and other shrines, the ruling elites of Mecca began to persecute the prophet and his followers.
The pressure became so great that some of Muhammad’s followers fled to Abyssinia
(modern Ethiopia). Muhammad himself remained in Mecca until 622 C.E., when he
too fled and joined a group of his followers in Yathrib, a rival trading city 345 kilometers (214 miles) north of Mecca. Muslims called their new home Medina (“the city,”
meaning “the city of the prophet”). Known as the hijra (“migration”), Muhammad’s
move to Medina serves as the starting point of the official Islamic calendar.
In Mecca Muhammad had lived within the established political framework and
concentrated on the moral and religious dimensions of his faith. In Medina he found
himself at the head of a small but growing society in exile that needed guidance in
practical as well as spiritual affairs. He organized his followers into a cohesive community called the umma (“community of the faithful”) and provided it with a comprehensive legal and social code. He led this community both in daily prayers to
Allah and in battle with enemies at Medina, Mecca, and other places. He looked after
the economic welfare of the umma—sometimes by organizing commercial ventures
and sometimes by launching raids against caravans from Mecca. Remembering the
difficult days of his youth, he provided relief for widows, orphans, and the poor, and
he made almsgiving a prime moral virtue.
Muhammad’s understanding of his religious mission expanded during his years at
Medina. He began to refer to himself as a prophet, indeed as the “seal of the
prophets”—the final prophet through whom Allah would reveal his message to
humankind. Muhammad accepted the authority of earlier Jewish and Christian
prophets, including Abraham, Moses, and Jesus, and he held the Hebrew scriptures
and the Christian New Testament in high esteem. He also accepted his predecessors’
monotheism: Allah was the same omnipotent, omniscient, omnipresent, and exclusive
deity as the Jews’ Yahweh and the Christians’ God. Muhammad taught, however, that

The Hijra

The Umma

The “Seal
of the Prophets”

349

ben06937.Ch14_344-373.qxd

350

PART III |

8/27/07

8:19 AM

Page 350

The Postclassical Era, 500 to 1000 C.E.

Sources from the Past
The Quran on Allah and His Expectations of Humankind
The foundation of the Islamic faith is the understanding of Allah, his nature, and his plan for the world as outlined
in the Quran. Through his visions Muhammad came to understand Allah as the one and only god, the creator and
sustainer of the world in the manner of the Jews’ Yahweh and the Christians’ God. Those who rejected Allah and his
message would suffer eternal punishment, but those who recognized and obeyed him would receive his mercy and secure
his blessings.
In the name of Allah, most benevolent, ever-merciful.
All praise be to Allah,
Lord of all the worlds,
Most beneficent, ever-merciful,
King of the Day of Judgement.
You alone we worship, and to You
alone turn for help.
Guide us (O Lord) to the path that is straight,
The path of those You have blessed,
Not of those who have earned Your anger,
nor those who have gone astray. . . .
Verily men and women who have come to submission,
men and women who are believers,
men and women who are devout,
truthful men and women,
men and women with endurance,
men and women who are modest,
men and women who give alms,
men and women who observe fasting,
men and women who guard their private parts,
and those men and women who remember God a
great deal,
for them God has forgiveness and a great reward.
No believing men and women have any choice in a
matter
after God and His Apostle [i.e., Muhammad] have
decided it.
Whoever disobeys God and His Apostle
has clearly lost the way and gone astray. . . .
O you who believe, remember God a great deal,
And sing His praises morning and evening.
It is He who sends His blessings on you,

as (do) His angels, that He may lead you out
of darkness into light,
for He is benevolent to the believers. . . .
I call to witness
the early hours of the morning,
And the night when dark and still,
Your Lord has neither left you,
nor despises you.
What is to come is better for you
than what has gone before;
For your Lord will certainly give you,
and you will be content.
Did He not find you an orphan
and take care of you?
Did He not find you poor
and enrich you?
So do not oppress the orphan,
And do not drive
the beggar away,
And keep recounting the favours of your Lord. . . .
Say: “He is God
the one the most unique,
God the immanently indispensable.
He has begotten no one,
and is begotten of none.
There is no one comparable to Him.”
FOR FURTHER REFLECTION

Compare the Quran’s teachings on the relationship between Allah and human beings with the views of Zoroastrians, Jews, and Christians discussed in earlier chapters.

SOURCE: Al-Qur’an: A Contemporary Translation. Trans. by Ahmed Ali. Princeton: Princeton University Press,
1984, pp. 11, 358, 359, 540, 559.

ben06937.Ch14_344-373.qxd

8/27/07

8:19 AM

Page 351

CHAPTER 14 |

The Expansive Realm of Islam

351

the message entrusted to him offered a more complete revelation of Allah and his
will than Jewish and Christian faiths had made available. Thus, while at Medina,
Muhammad came to see himself consciously as Allah’s final prophet: not simply as a
devout man who explained his spiritual insights to a small circle of family and friends,
but as the messenger who communicated Allah’s wishes and his plan for the world to
all humankind.

The Establishment of Islam in Arabia
Throughout their sojourn at Medina, Muhammad and his followers planned ultimately to return to Mecca, which was both their home and the leading city of Arabia. In 629 C.E. they arranged with the authorities to participate in the annual
pilgrimage to the Ka’ba, but they were not content with a short visit. In 630 they attacked Mecca and conquered the city. They forced the elites to adopt Muhammad’s
faith, and they imposed a government dedicated to Allah. They also destroyed the
pagan shrines and replaced them with mosques, buildings that sought to instill a
sense of sacredness and community where Muslims gathered for prayers. Only the
Ka’ba escaped their efforts to cleanse Mecca of pagan monuments.
Muhammad and his followers denied that the Ka’ba was the home of a deity, but
they preserved the black rock and its housing as a symbol of Mecca’s greatness. They
allowed only the faithful to approach the shrine, and in 632 Muhammad himself led
the first Islamic pilgrimage to the Ka’ba, thus establishing the hajj as an example for
all devout Muslims. Building on the conquest of Mecca, Muhammad and his followers launched campaigns against other towns and bedouin clans, and by the time of
the prophet’s death in 632, shortly after his hajj, they had brought most of Arabia
under their control.
Muhammad’s faith and his personal leadership decisively shaped the values and the
development of the Islamic community. The foundation of the Islamic faith as elaborated by Muhammad consists of obligations known as the Five Pillars of Islam: (1) Muslims must acknowledge Allah as the only god and Muhammad as his prophet. (2) They
must pray to Allah daily while facing Mecca. (3) They must observe a fast during the
daylight hours of the month of Ramadan. (4) They must contribute alms for the relief
of the weak and poor. (5) And, in honor of Muhammad’s visits to Mecca in 629 and
632, those who are physically and financially able must undertake the hajj and make at
least one pilgrimage to Mecca. During the centuries since its appearance, Islam has
generated many schools and sects, each with its own particular legal, social, and doctrinal features. The Five Pillars of Islam, however, constitute a simple but powerful framework that has bound the umma into a cohesive community of faith.
Some Muslims, though by no means all, have taken jihad as an additional obligation for the faithful. The term jihad literally means “struggle,” and Muslims have
understood its imperatives in various ways. In one sense, jihad imposes spiritual and
moral obligations on Muslims by requiring them to combat vice and evil. In another
sense, jihad calls on Muslims to struggle against ignorance and unbelief by spreading
the word of Islam and seeking converts to the faith. In some circumstances, jihad
also involves physical struggle, obliging Muslims to take up the sword and wage war
against unbelievers who threaten Islam.
Beyond the general obligations prescribed by the Five Pillars, Islamic holy law,
known as the sharia, emerged during the centuries after Muhammad and offered detailed guidance on proper behavior in almost every aspect of life. Elaborated by jurists
and legal scholars, the sharia drew its inspiration especially from the Quran and the

Muhammad’s
Return to Mecca

The Five Pillars
of Islam

Jihad

Islamic Law:
The Sharia
shari’a (shah-REE-ah)

ben06937.Ch14_344-373.qxd

352

PART III |

8/27/07

8:19 AM

Page 352

The Postclassical Era, 500 to 1000 C.E.

A watercolor painting
from sixteenthcentury Iran depicts
a caravan of pilgrims
traveling to Mecca
while making the hajj.

early historical accounts of Muhammad’s life and teachings. It offered precise guidance
on matters as diverse as marriage and family life, inheritance, slavery, business and commercial relationships, political authority in the dar al-Islam, and crime. Through the

ben06937.Ch14_344-373.qxd

8/27/07

8:19 AM

Page 353

CHAPTER 14 |

The Expansive Realm of Islam

sharia, Islam became more than a religious doctrine: it developed into a way of life
complete with social and ethical values derived from Islamic religious principles.

The Expansion of Islam
After Muhammad’s death the Islamic community might well have unraveled and disappeared. Muhammad had made no provision for a successor, and there was serious
division within the umma concerning the selection of a new leader. Many of the
towns and bedouin clans that had recently accepted Islam took the opportunity of
Muhammad’s death to renounce the faith, reassert their independence, and break
free from Mecca’s control. Within a short time, however, the Islamic community had
embarked on a stunningly successful round of military expansion that extended its
political and cultural influence far beyond the boundaries of Arabia. Those conquests
laid the foundation for the rapid growth of Islamic society.

The Early Caliphs and the Umayyad Dynasty
Because Muhammad was the “seal of the prophets,” it was inconceivable that another
prophet should succeed him. Shortly after Muhammad’s death his advisors selected
Abu Bakr, a genial man who was one of the prophet’s closest friends and most devoted disciples, to serve as caliph (“deputy”). Thus Abu Bakr and later caliphs led the
umma not as prophets but as lieutenants or substitutes for Muhammad. Abu Bakr became head of state for the Islamic community as well as chief judge, religious leader,
and military commander. Under the caliph’s leadership, the umma went on the offensive against the towns and bedouin clans that had renounced Islam after Muhammad’s death, and within a year it had compelled them to recognize the faith of Islam
and the rule of the caliph.
Indeed, during the century after Muhammad’s death, Islamic armies ranged well
beyond the boundaries of Arabia, carrying their religion and their authority to Byzantine and Sasanid territories and beyond. Although much less powerful than either the
Byzantine empire or the Sasanid empire, Muslim armies fought with particular effectiveness because their leaders had forged previously competing tribal groups into a
powerful state unified by their allegiance to Islam. Moreover, Muslim armies attacked
at a moment when the Byzantine and Sasanid empires were exhausted from perennial
conflicts with each other and when they also faced internal uprisings by overtaxed peasants and oppressed ethnic or religious minorities. Between 633 and 637 C.E., taking
advantage of those difficulties, Muslim forces seized Byzantine Syria and Palestine and
took most of Mesopotamia from the Sasanids. During the 640s they conquered Byzantine Egypt and north Africa. In 651 they toppled the Sasanid dynasty and incorporated
Persia into their expanding empire. In 711 they conquered the Hindu kingdom of
Sind in northwestern India. Between 711 and 718 they extended their authority to
northwest Africa and crossed the Strait of Gibraltar, conquering most of the Iberian
peninsula and threatening the Frankish kingdom in Gaul. By the mid-eighth century
an immense Islamic empire ruled lands from India and the central Asian steppe lands
in the east to northwest Africa and Iberia in the west.
During this rapid expansion the empire’s rulers encountered difficult problems of
governance and administration. One problem had to do with the selection of caliphs.
During the early decades after Muhammad’s death, leaders of the most powerful
Arab clans negotiated among themselves and appointed the first four caliphs. Political

The Caliph

The Expansion
of Islam

Abu Bakr (ah-BOO
BAHK-uhr)
Shia (SHEE-ah)

353

ben06937.Ch14_344-373.qxd

354

8/27/07

PART III |

8:19 AM

Page 354

The Postclassical Era, 500 to 1000 C.E.

0

Paris

A
RE

NE

ES

3000 km

Aral
Sea

P S
D a n u be

Black Sea

Rome
Constantinople

Toledo

CAU
CAS
MT US
NS
.

T U R K E S TA N

Bukhara
us
Ox

Sea
an
spi
Ca

PY

1500 mi
2000

1000

0

L

1000

500

Samarkand
M e dPalermo
Merv
S
Y
R
I
A
it
e r SICILY
Tunis
Palmyra
ra
RHODES
Nishapur
n e CRETE
CYPRUS
Tangier
an
PE R S IA
KHYBER
Damascus
S
e
S
a
PALESTINE ph
PASS
Isfahan
AIN
rates Baghdad
NT
Marrakech
Jerusalem
U
Tripoli
Alexandria
O
Basrah
M
AFRICA
S
Cairo
LA
Siraf
EGYPT
AT
In
si a
Medina
n
Córdoba

gris
Ti

Seville

r
Pe

du

s

Eu

dS
Re

Byzantine empire

Islam to 661

Lombard kingdom

Islam to 733

Frankish kingdom

Ni
le

Islam to 632

ea

SAHARA DESERT

Gu
lf

ARAB IA
I N DIA

Mecca

A rab i an
S ea

Abbasid caliphate about 800
ABYS S I N IA

Map 14.1 The expansion of Islam, 632–733 C.E. During the seventh and eighth centuries, the new faith of Islam expanded rapidly and dramatically
beyond its Arabian homeland. How might you explain the spread of a new faith? What political and cultural effects followed from the expansion of Islam?

The Shia

The Umayyad
Dynasty
Umayyad (oo-MEYE-ahd)

ambitions, personal differences, and clan loyalties complicated their deliberations,
however, and disputes soon led to the rise of factions and parties within the Islamic
community.
Disagreements over succession led to the emergence of the Shia sect, the most important and enduring of all the alternatives to the faith observed by the majority of
Muslims, known as Sunni Islam. The Shia sect originated as a party supporting the appointment of Ali and his descendants as caliphs. A cousin and son-in-law of Muhammad, Ali was a candidate for caliph when the prophet died, but support for Abu Bakr
was stronger. Ali served briefly as the fourth caliph (656–661 C.E.), but his enemies assassinated him, killed many of his relatives, and imposed their own candidate as caliph.
Partisans of Ali then organized the Shia (“party”), furiously resisted the victorious faction, and struggled to return the caliphate to the line of Ali. Although persecuted, the
Shia survived and strengthened its identity by adopting doctrines and rituals distinct
from those of the Sunnis (“traditionalists”), who accepted the legitimacy of the early
caliphs. Shia partisans, for example, observed holy days in honor of their leaders and
martyrs to their cause, and they taught that descendants of Ali were infallible, sinless,
and divinely appointed to rule the Islamic community. Shia Muslims also advanced interpretations of the Quran that support the party’s views, and the Shia itself has often
served as a source of support for those who oppose the policies of Sunni leaders.
After the assassination of Ali, the establishment of the Umayyad dynasty (661–750
C.E.) solved the problem of succession, at least temporarily. The Umayyads ranked
among the most prominent of the Meccan merchant clans, and their reputation and
network of alliances helped them bring stability to the Islamic community. Despite

ben06937.Ch14_344-373.qxd

8/27/07

8:19 AM

Page 355

CHAPTER 14 |

The Expansive Realm of Islam

their association with Mecca,
the Umayyads established their
capital at Damascus, a thriving
commercial city in Syria, whose
central location enabled them
to maintain better communication with the vast and stillexpanding Islamic empire.
Although the Umayyads’
dynasty solved the problem of
succession, their tightly centralized rule and the favor they
showed to their fellow Arabs
generated an administrative
problem. The Umayyads ruled
the dar al-Islam as conquerors, and their policies reflected
the interests of the Arab military aristocracy. The Umayyads
appointed members of this
elite as governors and administrators of conquered lands,
and they distributed the wealth
that they extracted among this
privileged class.
This policy contributed to
high morale among Arab conquerors, but it caused severe
discontent among the scores
of ethnic and religious groups
conquered by the Umayyad
empire. Apart from Muslims,
The early expansion of Islam was a bloody affair. This
the empire included Chrisillustration from an Arabic manuscript of the thirteenth
tians, Jews, Zoroastrians, and
century depicts a battle between Muhammad’s cousin
Buddhists. Apart from Arabs
Ali and his adversaries.
and bedouin, it included Indians, Persians, Mesopotamians, Greeks, Egyptians, and nomadic Berbers in north
Africa. The Arabs mostly allowed conquered peoples to observe their own religions—
particularly Christians and Jews—but they levied a special head tax, called the jizya,
on those who did not convert to Islam. Even those who converted did not enjoy access to wealth and positions of authority, which the Umayyads reserved almost exclusively for members of the Arab military aristocracy. This caused deep resentment
among conquered peoples and led to restiveness against Umayyad rule.
Beginning in the early eighth century, the Umayyad caliphs became alienated
even from other Arabs. They devoted themselves increasingly to luxurious living
rather than to zealous leadership of the umma, and they scandalized devout Muslims
by their casual attitudes toward Islamic doctrine and morality. By midcentury the
Umayyad caliphs faced not only the resistance of the Shia, whose members continued to promote descendants of Ali for caliph, but also the discontent of conquered
peoples throughout their empire and even the disillusionment of Muslim Arab military leaders.

355

Policy toward
Conquered Peoples

Umayyad Decline

Abbasid (ah-BAH-sihd)

ben06937.Ch14_344-373.qxd

356

PART III |

8/27/07

8:19 AM

Page 356

The Postclassical Era, 500 to 1000 C.E.

The Abbasid Dynasty
Abu al-Abbas

The Abbasid Dynasty

Abbasid
Administration

Rebellion in Persia brought the Umayyad dynasty to an end. The chief leader of the
rebellion was Abu al-Abbas, a descendant of Muhammad’s uncle. Although he was a
Sunni Arab, Abu al-Abbas allied readily with Shias and with Muslims who were not
Arabs, such as converts to Islam from southwest Asia. Particularly prominent among
his supporters were Persian converts who resented the preference shown by the
Umayyads to Arab Muslims. During the 740s Abu al-Abbas’s party rejected Umayyad
authority and seized control of Persia and Mesopotamia. In 750 his army shattered
Umayyad forces in a huge battle. Afterward Abu al-Abbas invited the remaining members of the Umayyad clan to a banquet under the pretext of reconciling their differences. During the festivities his troops arrested the Umayyads and slaughtered them,
effectively annihilating the clan. Abu al-Abbas then founded the Abbasid dynasty, which
was the principal source of authority in the dar al-Islam until the Mongols toppled it
in 1258 C.E.
The Abbasid dynasty differed considerably from the Umayyad. For one thing the
Abbasid state was far more cosmopolitan than its predecessor. Even though they
sprang from the ranks of conquering Arabs, Abbasid rulers did not show special favor
to the Arab military aristocracy. Arabs continued to play a large role in government,
but Persians, Egyptians, Mesopotamians, and others also rose to positions of wealth
and power.
The Abbasid dynasty differed from the Umayyad also in that it was not a conquering dynasty. The Abbasids sparred intermittently with the Byzantine empire,
they clashed frequently with nomadic peoples from central Asia, and in 751 they defeated a Chinese army at Talas River near Samarkand. The battle of Talas River was
exceptionally important: it ended the expansion of China’s Tang dynasty into central
Asia (discussed in chapter 15), and it opened the door for the spread of Islam among
Turkish peoples. Only marginally, however, did the Abbasids expand their empire by
conquest. The dar al-Islam as a whole continued to grow during the Abbasid era,
but the caliphs had little to do with the expansion. During the ninth and early tenth
centuries, for example, largely autonomous Islamic forces from distant Tunisia
mounted naval expeditions throughout the Mediterranean, conquering Crete, Sicily,
and the Balearic Islands while seizing territories also in Cyprus, Rhodes, Sardinia,
Corsica, southern Italy, and southern France.
Instead of conquering new lands, the Abbasids largely contented themselves with
administering the empire they inherited. Fashioning a government that could administer a sprawling realm with scores of linguistic, ethnic, and cultural groups was a considerable challenge. In designing their administration, the Abbasids relied heavily on
Persian techniques of statecraft. Central authority came from the court at Baghdad
(capital of modern Iraq), the magnificent city that the early Abbasid caliphs built near
the Sasanid capital of Ctesiphon. Baghdad was a round city protected by three round
walls. At the heart of the city was the caliph’s green-domed palace, from which instructions flowed to the distant reaches of the Abbasid realm. In the provinces, governors represented the caliph and implemented his political and financial policies.
Learned officials known as ulama (“people with religious knowledge”) and qadis
(“judges”) set moral standards in local communities and resolved disputes. Ulama
and qadis were not priests—Islam does not recognize priests as a distinct class of religious specialists—but they had a formal education that emphasized study of the Quran
and the sharia. Ulama were pious scholars who sought to develop public policy in accordance with the Quran and sharia. Qadis heard cases at law and rendered decisions

ben06937.Ch14_344-373.qxd

8/27/07

8:19 AM

Page 357

CHAPTER 14 |

The Expansive Realm of Islam

357

Sources from the Past
Benjamin of Tudela on the Caliph’s Court at Baghdad
Like Constantinople, Baghdad was in a period of decline when the Spanish rabbi Benjamin of Tudela visited in the
later twelfth century. Nevertheless, again like the Byzantine capital, Baghdad remained an immensely prosperous city.
Benjamin’s report on Baghdad concentrated largely on the court and palace of the Abbasid caliph.
The caliph is the head of the Muslim religion, and all the
kings of Islam obey him; he occupies a similar position
to that held by the pope over the Christians. He has a
palace in Baghdad three miles in extent, wherein there is
a great park with all varieties of trees, fruit-bearing and
otherwise, and all manner of animals. The whole is surrounded by a wall, and in the park there is a lake whose
waters are fed by the river Hiddekel. Whenever the king
desires to indulge in recreation and to rejoice and feast,
his servants catch all manner of birds, game, and fish,
and he goes to his palace with his counsellors and
princes. . . .
Each of his brothers and the members of his family
has an abode in his palace, but they are all fettered in
chains of iron, and guards are placed over each of their
houses so that they may not rise against the great caliph.
For once it happened to a predecessor that his brothers
rose up against him and proclaimed one of themselves
as caliph; then it was decreed that all the members of his
family should be bound, that they might not rise up
against the ruling caliph. Each one of them resides in his
palace in great splendor, and they own villages and
towns, and their stewards bring them the tribute
thereof, and they eat and drink and rejoice all the days
of their life.
Within the domains of the palace of the caliph there
are great buildings of marble and columns of silver and
gold, and carvings upon rare stones are fixed in the walls.
In the caliph’s palace are great riches and towers filled
with gold, silken garments, and all precious stones. . . .
The caliph is a benevolent man. On the other side
of the river, on the banks of an arm of the Euphrates
which there borders the city, he built a hospital consist-

ing of blocks of houses and hospices for the sick poor
who come to be healed. Here there are about sixty
physicians’ stores which are provided from the caliph’s
house with drugs and whatever else may be required.
Every sick man who comes is maintained at the caliph’s
expense and is medically treated. Here is a building
which is called Dar-al-Maristan, where they keep charge
of the demented people who have become insane in the
towns through the great heat in the summer, and they
chain each of them in iron chains until their reason becomes restored to them in the winter. While they abide
there, they are provided with food from the house of the
caliph, and when their reason is restored they are dismissed and each one of them goes to his house and his
home. Money is given to those that have stayed in the
hospices on their return to their homes. Every month
the officers of the caliph inquire and investigate whether
they have regained their reason, in which case they are
discharged. All this the caliph does out of charity to
those that come to the city of Baghdad, whether they be
sick or insane. The caliph is a righteous man, and all his
actions are for good. . . .
The city of Baghdad is twenty miles in circumference, situated in a land of palms, gardens, and plantations, the like of which is not to be found in the whole
land of Mesopotamia. People come thither with merchandise from all lands. Wise men live there, philosophers who know all manner of wisdom, and magicians
expert in all manner of witchcraft.
FOR FURTHER REFLECTION

Compare Baghdad and Constantinople on the basis of
descriptions provided by Benjamin of Tudela.

SOURCE: Benjamin of Tudela. The Itinerary of Benjamin of Tudela. Trans. by M. N. Adler.
London: H. Frowde, 1907, pp. 35– 42. (Translation slightly modified.)

based on the Quran and sharia. Because of their moral authority, ulama and qadis became extremely influential officials who helped to ensure widespread observance of
Islamic values. Apart from provincial governors, ulama, and qadis, the Abbasid caliphs

ben06937.Ch14_344-373.qxd

358

PART III |

Harun al-Rashid

Abbasid Decline

8/27/07

8:19 AM

Page 358

The Postclassical Era, 500 to 1000 C.E.

kept a standing army, and they established bureaucratic ministries in charge of taxation, finance, coinage, and postal services. They also maintained the magnificent network of roads that the Islamic empire inherited from the Sasanids.
The high point of the Abbasid dynasty came during the reign of the caliph Harun
al-Rashid (786–809 C.E.). By the late eighth century, Abbasid authority had lost some
of its force in provinces distant from Baghdad, but it remained strong enough to bring
reliable tax revenues from most parts of the empire. Flush with wealth, Baghdad became a center of banking, commerce, crafts, and industrial production, a metropolis
with a population of several hundred thousand people. According to stories from his
time, Harun al-Rashid provided liberal support for artists and writers, bestowed lavish
and luxurious gifts on his favorites, and distributed money to the poor and the common classes by tossing coins into the streets of Baghdad. Once he sent an elephant
and a collection of rich presents as gifts to his contemporary Charlemagne, who ruled
the Carolingian empire of western Europe.
Soon after Harun al-Rashid’s reign, the Abbasid empire entered a period of decline. Civil war between Harun’s sons seriously damaged Abbasid authority, and disputes over succession rights became a recurring problem for the dynasty. Provincial
governors took advantage of disorder in the ruling house by acting independently of
the caliphs: instead of implementing imperial policies and delivering taxes to Baghdad, they built up local bases of power and in some cases actually seceded from the
Abbasid empire. Meanwhile, popular uprisings and peasant rebellions, which often
enjoyed the support of dissenting sects and heretical movements, further weakened
the empire.
As a result of those difficulties, the Abbasid caliphs became mere figureheads
long before the Mongols extinguished the dynasty in 1258. In 945 members of a
Persian noble family seized control of Baghdad and established their clan as the
power behind the Abbasid throne. Later, imperial authorities in Baghdad fell under
the control of the Saljuq Turks, a nomadic people from central Asia who also invaded the Byzantine empire. In response to rebellions mounted by peasants and
provincial governors, authorities in Baghdad allied with the Saljuqs, who began to
enter the Abbasid realm and convert to Islam about the mid-tenth century. By the
mid-eleventh century the Saljuqs effectively controlled the Abbasid empire. During
the 1050s they took possession of Baghdad, and during the following decades they
extended their authority to Syria, Palestine, and Anatolia. They retained Abbasid
caliphs as nominal sovereigns, but for two centuries, until the arrival of the Mongols, the Saljuq sultan (“chieftain” or “ruler”) was the true source of power in the
Abbasid empire.

Economy and Society
of the Early Islamic World
In the dar al-Islam, as in other agricultural societies, peasants tilled the land as their
ancestors had done for centuries before them, while manufacturers and merchants
supported a thriving urban economy. Here, as in other lands, the creation of large
empires had dramatic economic implications. The Umayyad and Abbasid empires
created a zone of trade, exchange, and communication stretching from India to
Iberia. Commerce throughout this zone served as a vigorous economic stimulus for
both the countryside and the cities of the early Islamic world.

ben06937.Ch14_344-373.qxd

8/27/07

8:19 AM

Page 359

CHAPTER 14 |

The Expansive Realm of Islam

359

In a thirteenth-century manuscript illustration,
a fictional Muslim traveler passes a lively
agricultural village. On the left a woman
spins cotton thread. Sheep, goats, chickens,
and date palms figure prominently in the
local economy.

New Crops, Agricultural Experimentation,
and Urban Growth
As soldiers, administrators, diplomats, and merchants traveled throughout the dar alIslam, they encountered plants, animals, and agricultural techniques peculiar to the
empire’s various regions. They often introduced particularly useful crops to other regions. The most important of the transplants traveled west from India to Persia, southwest Asia, Arabia, Egypt, north Africa, Spain, and the Mediterranean islands of
Cyprus, Crete, Sicily, and Sardinia. They included staple crops such as sugarcane, rice,
and new varieties of sorghum and wheat; vegetables such as spinach, artichokes, and
eggplants; fruits such as oranges, lemons, limes, bananas, coconuts, watermelons, and
mangoes; and industrial crops such as cotton, indigo, and henna.
The introduction of these crops into the western regions of the Islamic world
had wide-ranging effects. New food crops led to a richer and more varied diet. They
also increased quantities of food available because they enabled cultivators to extend
the growing season. In much of the Islamic world, summers are so hot and dry that
cultivators traditionally left their fields fallow during that season. Most of the transplanted crops grew well in high heat, however, so cultivators in southwest Asia, north

The Spread of Food
and Industrial Crops

Effects of New Crops

ben06937.Ch14_344-373.qxd

360

PART III |

Agricultural
Experimentation

Urban Growth

8/27/07

8:19 AM

Page 360

The Postclassical Era, 500 to 1000 C.E.

Africa, and other hot zones could till their lands year-round. The result was a dramatic increase in food supplies.
Some new crops had industrial uses. The most important of these was cotton,
which became the basis for a thriving textile industry throughout much of the Islamic world. Indigo and henna yielded dyes that textile manufacturers used in large
quantities.
Travel and communication in the dar al-Islam also encouraged experimentation
with agricultural methods. Cultivators paid close attention to methods of irrigation,
fertilization, crop rotation, and the like, and they outlined their findings in hundreds
of agricultural manuals. Copies of these works survive in numerous manuscripts that
circulated widely throughout the Islamic world. The combined effect of new crops
and improved techniques was a far more productive agricultural economy, which in
turn supported vigorous economic growth throughout the dar al-Islam.
Increased agricultural production contributed to the rapid growth of cities in all
parts of the Islamic world from India to Spain. Delhi, Samarkand, Bukhara, Merv,
Nishapur, Isfahan, Basra, Baghdad, Damascus, Jerusalem, Cairo, Alexandria, Palermo, Tunis, Tangier, Córdoba, and Toledo were all bustling cities, some with populations of several hundred thousand people. All these cities had flourishing markets
supporting thousands of artisans, craftsmen, and merchants. Most of them were
also important centers of industrial production, particularly of textiles, pottery,
glassware, leather, iron, and
steel.
One new industry appeared in Islamic cities during
the Abbasid era: paper manufacture. Chinese craftsmen
had made paper since the first
century C.E., but their technology did not spread far beyond China until Arab forces
defeated a Chinese army at
the battle of Talas River in
751 and took prisoners skilled
in paper production. Paper
was cheaper and easier to use
than writing materials such as
vellum sheets made from calfskin, and it soon became popular throughout the Islamic
world. Paper facilitated the
keeping of administrative and
commercial records, and it
made possible the dissemination of books and treatises in
larger quantities than ever
before. By the tenth century,
mills produced paper in PerCaravanserais offered splendid facilities for caravan
sia, Mesopotamia, Arabia,
merchants, but they sometimes harbored dangers. In
Egypt, and Spain, and the inthis illustration from a thirteenth-century manuscript,
dustry soon spread to westdrugged merchants sleep soundly while burglars relieve
them of their valuables.
ern Europe.

ben06937.Ch14_344-373.qxd

8/27/07

8:19 AM

Page 361

CHAPTER 14 |

The Expansive Realm of Islam

361

The Formation of a
Hemispheric Trading Zone
From its earliest days Islamic society drew much of its prosperity
from commerce. Muhammad
himself was a merchant, and
he held merchants in high esteem. According to early accounts of his life, Muhammad
once said that honest merchants would stand alongside
martyrs to the faith on the day
of judgment. By the time of the
Abbasid caliphate, elaborate trade
networks linked all the regions of
the Islamic world and joined it to a
larger, hemispheric, economy.
When they overran the Sasanid empire,
Muslim conquerors brought
A map produced in the eleventh century by the Arab
the prosperous trading cities
geographer al-Idrisi shows the lands known and reported
of central Asia under control
by Muslim merchants and travelers. Note that, in accordance with Muslim cartographic convention, this map
of the expanding dar al-Islam.
places south at the top and north at the bottom.
Merv, Nishapur, Bukhara, and
Samarkand were long-established commercial centers, and they made it possible for Muslim merchants to trade
over a revived silk roads network extending from China in the east to the Mediterranean in the west. Thus Muslim merchants were able to take advantage of the extensive
road networks originally built during the classical era by imperial authorities in India,
Persia, and the Mediterranean basin. Umayyad and Abbasid rulers maintained the roads
that they inherited because they provided splendid routes for military forces and administrative officials traveling through the dar al-Islam. But those same roads also made excellent highways for merchants as well as missionaries and pilgrims. Travel along the
roads could be remarkably speedy and efficient. After the tenth century, for example,
the Muslim rulers of Egypt regularly imported ice from the mountains of Syria to their
palace in Cairo. Even during the summer months, they received five camel loads of ice
weekly to cool their food and drink.
Overland trade traveled mostly by camel caravan. Although they are unpleasant and
often uncooperative beasts, camels endure the rigors of desert travel much better than
oxen, horses, or donkeys. Moreover, when fitted with a well-designed saddle, camels
can carry heavy loads. During the early centuries C.E., the manufacture of camel saddles
spread throughout Arabia, north Africa, southwest Asia, and central Asia, and camels
became the favored beasts of burden in deserts and other dry regions. As camel transport became more common, the major cities of the Islamic world and central Asia built
and maintained caravanserais—inns offering lodging for caravan merchants as well as
food, water, and care for their animals.
Meanwhile, innovations in nautical technology contributed to a steadily increasing
volume of maritime trade in the Red Sea, Persian Gulf, Arabian Sea, and Indian
Ocean. Arab and Persian mariners borrowed the compass from its Chinese inventors
and used it to guide them on the high seas. From southeast Asian and Indian mariners,
they borrowed the lateen sail, a triangular sail that increased a ship’s maneuverability.

Overland Trade

Camels and Caravans

Maritime Trade

ben06937.Ch14_344-373.qxd

362

PART III |

8/27/07

8:19 AM

Page 362

The Postclassical Era, 500 to 1000 C.E.

In this thirteenth-century manuscript illustration, merchants at a slave market in southern Arabia deal in black
slaves captured in sub-Saharan Africa. Slaves traded in
Islamic markets also came from Russia and eastern
Europe.

Banks

The Organization
of Trade

From the Hellenistic Mediterranean they borrowed the astrolabe, an instrument that
enabled them to calculate latitude.
Thus equipped, Arab and Persian mariners ventured throughout the Indian Ocean
basin, calling at ports from southern China to southeast Asia, Ceylon, India, Persia,
Arabia, and the eastern coast of Africa. The twelfth-century Persian merchant Ramisht
of Siraf (a flourishing port city on the Persian Gulf ) amassed a huge fortune from
long-distance trading ventures. One of Ramisht’s clerks once returned to Siraf from a
commercial voyage to China with a cargo worth half a million dinars—gold coins that
were the standard currency in the Islamic world. Ramisht himself was one of the
wealthiest men of his age, and he spent much of his fortune on pious causes. He outfitted the Ka’ba with a Chinese silk cover that reportedly cost him eighteen thousand
dinars, and he also founded a hospital and a religious sanctuary in Mecca.
Banking also stimulated the commercial economy of the Islamic world. Banks had
operated since classical antiquity, but Islamic banks of the Abbasid period conducted
business on a much larger scale and provided a more extensive range of services than
did their predecessors. They not only lent money to entrepreneurs but also served as
brokers for investments and exchanged different currencies. They established multiple
branches that honored letters of credit known as sakk—the root of the modern word
check—drawn on the parent bank. Thus merchants could draw letters of credit in one
city and cash them in another, and they could settle accounts with distant business
partners without having to deal in cash.
Trade benefited also from techniques of business organization. Like banking, these
techniques had precedents in classical Mediterranean society, but increasing volumes of

ben06937.Ch14_344-373.qxd

8/27/07

8:19 AM

Page 363

CHAPTER 14 |

The Expansive Realm of Islam

trade enabled entrepreneurs to
refine their methods of organization. Furthermore, Islamic law
provided security for entrepreneurs by explicitly recognizing
certain forms of business organization. Usually Islamic businessmen preferred not to embark on
solo ventures, since an individual could face financial ruin if an
entire cargo of commodities fell
prey to pirates or went down
with a ship that sank in a storm.
Instead, like their counterparts
in other postclassical societies,
Abbasid entrepreneurs often
pooled their resources in group
investments. If several individuals invested in several cargoes,
they could distribute their risks
and more easily absorb losses.
Furthermore, if several groups
of investors rented cargo space
on several different ships, they
spread their risks even more. Entrepreneurs entered into a variety of legally recognized joint
endeavors during the Abbasid
caliphate. Some involved simply
Interior of the mosque at Córdoba, originally built in
the investment of money in an
the late eighth century and enlarged during the ninth
enterprise, whereas others called
and tenth centuries. One of the largest structures in
for some or all of the partners to
the dar al-Islam, the mosque rests on 850 columns
play active roles in their business
and features nineteen aisles.
ventures.
As a result of improved transportation, expanded banking services, and refined
techniques of business organization, long-distance trade surged in the early Islamic
world. Muslim merchants dealt in silk and ceramics from China, spices and aromatics
from India and southeast Asia, and jewelry and fine textiles from the Byzantine empire. Merchants also ventured beyond settled societies in China, India, and the Mediterranean basin to distant lands that previously had not engaged systematically in
long-distance trade. They crossed the Sahara desert by camel caravan to trade salt,
steel, copper, and glass for gold and slaves from the kingdoms of west Africa. They
visited the coastal regions of east Africa, where they obtained slaves and exotic local
commodities such as animal skins. They engaged in trade with Russia and Scandinavia by way of the Dnieper and Volga rivers and obtained high-value commodities
such as animal skins, furs, honey, amber, and slaves as well as bulk goods such as timber and livestock. The vigorous economy of the Abbasid empire thus helped to establish networks of communication and exchange throughout much of the eastern
hemisphere.
The prosperity of Islamic Spain, known as al-Andalus, illustrates the far-reaching
effects of long-distance trade during the Abbasid era. Most of the Iberian peninsula

Al-Andalus

363

ben06937.Ch14_344-373.qxd

364

PART III |

8/27/07

8:19 AM

Page 364

The Postclassical Era, 500 to 1000 C.E.

had fallen into the hands of Muslim Berber conquerors from north Africa during the
early eighth century. The governors of al-Andalus were Umayyads who refused to
recognize the Abbasid dynasty, and beginning in the tenth century they styled themselves caliphs in their own right rather than governors subject to Abbasid authority.
Despite political and diplomatic tensions, al-Andalus participated actively in the commercial life of the larger Islamic world. The merchant-scholar al-Marwani of Córdoba, for example, made his hajj in 908 and then traveled to Iraq and India on
commercial ventures. His profits amounted to thirty thousand dinars—all of which
he lost in a shipwreck during his return home.
Imported crops increased the supply of food and enriched the diet of al-Andalus,
enabling merchants and manufacturers to conduct thriving businesses in cities such as
Córdoba, Toledo, and Seville. Ceramics, painted tiles, lead crystal, and gold jewelry
from al-Andalus enjoyed a reputation for excellence and helped pay for imported goods
and the building of a magnificent capital city at Córdoba. During the tenth century
Córdoba had more than 16 kilometers (10 miles) of lighted public roads as well as free
Islamic schools, a gargantuan mosque, and a splendid library with four hundred thousand volumes.

The Changing Status of Women

The Quran
and Women

Veiling of Women

A patriarchal society had emerged in Arabia long before Muhammad’s time, but Arab
women enjoyed rights not accorded to women in many other lands. They could
legally inherit property, divorce husbands on their own initiative, and engage in business ventures. Khadija, the first of Muhammad’s wives, managed a successful commercial business.
In some respects the Quran enhanced the security of women in Arabian society. It
outlawed female infanticide, and it provided that dowries went directly to brides rather
than to their husbands and male guardians. It portrayed women not as the property
of their menfolk but as honorable individuals, equal to men before Allah, with their
own rights and needs. Muhammad’s kindness and generosity toward his wives, as
related in early accounts of the prophet’s life, also served as an example that may
have improved the lives of Muslim women.
For the most part, however, the Quran—and later the sharia as well—reinforced
male dominance. The Quran and Islamic holy law recognized descent through the
male line, and to guarantee proper inheritance, they placed a high premium on genealogical purity. To ensure the legitimacy of heirs, they subjected the social and sexual
lives of women to the strict control of male guardians—fathers, brothers, and husbands. Though teaching that men should treat women with sensitivity and respect, the
Quran and the sharia permitted men to follow Muhammad’s example and take up to
four wives, whereas women could have only one husband. The Quran and the sharia
thus provided a religious and legal foundation for a decisively patriarchal society.
When Islam expanded into the Byzantine and Sasanid empires, it encountered
strong patriarchal traditions, and Muslims readily adopted long-standing customs
such as the veiling of women. Social and family pressures had induced upper-class
urban women to veil themselves in Mesopotamia as early as the thirteenth century
B.C.E., and long before Muhammad the practice of veiling had spread to Persia and
the eastern Mediterranean. As a sign of modesty, upper-class urban women covered
their faces and ventured outside their homes only in the company of servants or chaperones so as to discourage the attention of men. When Muslim Arabs conquered
Mesopotamia, Persia, and eastern Mediterranean lands, they adopted the veiling of

ben06937.Ch14_344-373.qxd

8/27/07

8:19 AM

Page 365

CHAPTER 14 |

The Expansive Realm of Islam

365

women. A conspicuous symbol of male authority thus found a prominent place in the
early Islamic community.
The Quran served as the preeminent source of authority in the world of Islam,
and it provided specific rights for Muslim women. Over the centuries, however, jurists and legal scholars interpreted the Quran in ways that progressively limited those
rights and placed women increasingly under the control of male guardians. To a large
extent the increased emphasis on male authority in Islamic law reflected the influence
of the strongly hierarchical and patriarchal societies of Mesopotamia, Persia, and
eastern Mediterranean lands as Islam developed from a local faith to a large-scale
complex society.

Islamic Values and Cultural Exchanges
Since the seventh century C.E., the Quran has served as the cornerstone of Islamic society. Arising from a rich tradition of bedouin poetry and song, the Quran established
Arabic as a flexible and powerful medium of communication. Even today Muslims regard the Arabic text of the Quran as the only definitive and reliable scripture: translations do not possess the power and authority of the original. When carrying their faith
to new lands during the era of Islamic expansion, Muslim missionaries spread the message of Allah and provided instruction in the Quran’s teachings, although usually they
also permitted continued observance of pre-Islamic traditions. Muslim intellectuals
drew freely from the long-established cultural traditions of Persia, India, and Greece,
which they became acquainted with during the Umayyad and Abbasid eras.

The Formation of an Islamic Cultural Tradition
Muslim theologians and jurists looked to the Quran, stories about Muhammad’s life,
and other sources of Islamic doctrine in their efforts to formulate moral guidelines
appropriate for their society. The body of civil and criminal law embodied in the
sharia provided a measure of cultural unity for the vastly different lands of the Islamic world. Islamic law did not by any means erase the differences, but it established a common cultural foundation that facilitated dealings between peoples of
various Islamic lands and that lent substance to the concept of the dar al-Islam.
On a more popular level, ulama, qadis, and missionaries helped to bridge differences in cultural traditions and to spread Islamic values throughout the dar al-Islam.
Ulama and qadis held positions at all Islamic courts, and they were prominent in the
public life of all cities in the Islamic world. By resolving disputes according to Islamic
law and ordering public observance of Islamic social and moral standards, they brought
the values of the Quran and the sharia into the lives of peoples living far from the birthplace of Islam.
Formal educational institutions also promoted Islamic values. Many mosques maintained schools that provided an elementary education and religious instruction, and
wealthy Muslims sometimes established schools and provided endowments for their
support. By the tenth century institutions of higher education known as madrasas had
begun to appear, and by the twelfth century they had become established in the major
cities of the Islamic world. Muslim rulers often supported the madrasas in the interests
of recruiting literate and learned students with an advanced education in Islamic theology and law for administrative positions. Inexpensive paper enhanced scholars’ ability
to instruct students and disseminate their views.

Promotion of
Islamic Values

madrasas (MAH-drahs-uhs)

ben06937.Ch14_344-373.qxd

366

PART III |

8/27/07

8:19 AM

Page 366

The Postclassical Era, 500 to 1000 C.E.

In this manuscript illustration a Muslim teacher (the figure
with the open book) instructs students in a library near
Baghdad in the fine points of Islamic law.

Sufis

Al-Ghazali

Sufi Missionaries

Among the most effective Islamic missionaries were mystics known as Sufis. The
term Sufi probably came from the patched woolen garments favored by the mystics.
Sufis did not deny Islamic doctrine, and indeed many of them had an advanced education in Islamic theology and law. But they also did not find formal religious teachings
to be especially meaningful. Thus, instead of concerning themselves with fine points of
doctrine, Sufis worked to deepen their spiritual awareness. Most Sufis led pious and ascetic lives. Some devoted themselves to helping the poor. A few gave up their possessions and lived as mendicant beggars. Many sought a mystical, ecstatic union with
Allah, relying on rousing sermons, passionate singing, or spirited dancing to bring
them to a state of high emotion. Muslim theologians sometimes mistrusted Sufis, fearing that in their lack of concern for doctrine they would adopt erroneous beliefs. Nevertheless, after the ninth century Sufis became increasingly popular in Muslim societies
because of their piety, devotion, and eagerness to minister to the needs of their fellow
human beings.
Most important of the early Sufis was the Persian theologian al-Ghazali (1058–1111),
who argued that human reason was too frail to understand the nature of Allah and
hence could not explain the mysteries of the world. Only through devotion and guidance from the Quran could human beings begin to appreciate the uniqueness and
power of Allah. Indeed, al-Ghazali held that philosophy and human reasoning were
vain pursuits that would inevitably lead to confusion rather than understanding.
Sufis were especially effective as missionaries because they emphasized devotion to
Allah above mastery of doctrine. They sometimes encouraged individuals to revere
Allah in their own ways, even if those ways did not have a basis in the Quran. They

ben06937.Ch14_344-373.qxd

8/27/07

8:19 AM

Page 367

CHAPTER 14 |

The Expansive Realm of Islam

Through song, dance, and ecstatic experiences, sometimes enhanced by wine, Persian Sufis
expressed their devotion to Allah, as in this sixteenth-century painting.

tolerated the continued observance of pre-Islamic customs, for example, as well as the
association of Allah with deities recognized and revered in other faiths. The Sufis
themselves led ascetic and holy lives, which won them the respect of the peoples to
whom they preached. Because of their kindness, holiness, tolerance, and charismatic
appeal, Sufis attracted numerous converts particularly in lands such as Persia and India,
where long-established religious faiths such as Zoroastrianism, Christianity, Buddhism, and Hinduism had enjoyed a mass following for centuries.

367

ben06937.Ch14_344-373.qxd

368

PART III |

Hajj

8/27/07

8:19 AM

Page 368

The Postclassical Era, 500 to 1000 C.E.

The symbol of Islamic cultural unity was the Ka’ba at Mecca, which from an early
date attracted pilgrims from all parts of the Islamic world. The Abbasid caliphs especially encouraged observance of the hajj: they saw themselves as supreme leaders of a
cohesive Islamic community, and as a matter of policy they sought to enhance the cultural unity of their realm. They built inns along the main roads to Mecca for the convenience of travelers, policed the routes to ensure the safety of pilgrims, and made
lavish gifts to shrines and sites of pilgrimage. Individuals from far-flung regions of the
Abbasid empire made their way to Mecca, visited the holy sites, and learned firsthand
the traditions of Islam. Over the centuries those pilgrims spread Islamic beliefs and values to all parts of the Islamic world, and with the work of ulama, qadis, and Sufi missionaries, their efforts helped to make the dar al-Islam not just a name but also a reality.

Islam and the Cultural Traditions of Persia, India, and Greece

Persian Influences
on Islam

Indian Influences
on Islam

As the Islamic community expanded, Muslims of Arab ancestry interacted regularly
with peoples from other cultural traditions, especially those of Persia, India, and
Greece. In some cases, particularly in lands ruled by the Umayyad and Abbasid dynasties, large numbers of conquered peoples converted to Islam, and they brought elements of their inherited cultural traditions into Islamic society. In other cases,
particularly in lands beyond the authority of Islamic rulers, Muslims became acquainted with the literary, artistic, philosophical, and scientific traditions of peoples
who chose not to convert. Nevertheless, their traditions often held considerable interest for Muslims, who adapted them for their own purposes.
Persian traditions quickly found a place in Islamic society, since the culturally rich
land of Persia fell under Islamic rule at an early date. Especially after the establishment
of the Abbasid dynasty and the founding of its capital at Baghdad, Persian traditions
deeply influenced Islamic political and cultural leaders. Persian administrative techniques, which Muslim conquerors borrowed from the Sasanid empire, were crucial for
the organization of the imperial structure through which Umayyad and Abbasid rulers
governed their vast empire. Meanwhile, Persian ideas of kingship profoundly influenced Islamic political thought. Muslim caliphs and regional governors drew readily
on Persian views of kings as wise and benevolent but nonetheless absolute rulers.
Persian influence was also noticeable in literary works from the Abbasid dynasty.
Although Arabic served as the language of religion, theology, philosophy, and law, Persian was the principal language of literature, poetry, history, and political reflection.
The verses of Omar Khayyam entitled the Rubaiyat (“quatrains”) are widely known,
thanks to a popular English translation by the Victorian poet Edward Fitzgerald, but
many other writers composed works that in Persian display even greater literary elegance and originality. The marvelous collection of stories known as The Arabian
Nights, or The Thousand and One Nights, for example, presented popular tales of adventure and romance set in the Abbasid empire and the court of Harun al-Rashid.
Indian mathematics, science, and medicine captured the attention of Arab and
Persian Muslims who established Islamic states in northern India. The sophisticated
mathematical tradition of Gupta India was attractive to Muslims both as a field of
scholarship and for the practical purposes of reckoning and keeping accounts. Muslims readily adopted what they called “Hindi” numerals, which European peoples
later called “Arabic” numerals, since they learned about them through Arab Muslims.
Hindi numerals enabled Muslim scholars to develop an impressive tradition of advanced mathematics, concentrating on algebra (an Arabic word) as well as trigonometry and geometry. From a more practical point of view, Indian numerals vastly

ben06937.Ch14_344-373.qxd

8/27/07

8:19 AM

Page 369

CHAPTER 14 |

The Expansive Realm of Islam

An illustration from a thirteenth-century, Arabic-language manuscript depicts the Greek
philosopher Aristotle teaching three students about the astrolabe, an instrument that
enabled the user to determine latitude.

simplified bookkeeping for Muslim merchants working in the lively commercial economy of the Abbasid dynasty.
Muslims also found much to appreciate in the scientific and medical thought they
encountered in India. With the aid of their powerful and flexible mathematics, Indian scholars were able to carry out precise astronomical calculations, which helped
inspire the development of Muslim astronomy. Similarly, Indian medicine appealed
to Muslims because of its treatments for specific ailments and its use of antidotes for
poisons. Muslim visitors often railed against Indian religious beliefs—both Hindu
and Buddhist—but they uniformly praised Indian mathematical, scientific, and medical thought, which they avidly adopted for their own uses and purposes.
Muslims also admired the philosophical, scientific, and medical writings of classical Greece. They became especially interested in Plato and Aristotle, whose works
they translated and interpreted in commentaries. During the tenth and eleventh centuries, some Muslim philosophers sought to synthesize Greek and Muslim thought
by harmonizing Plato with the teachings of Islam. They encountered resistance
among conservative theologians such as the Sufi al-Ghazali, who considered Greek
philosophy a completely unreliable guide to ultimate truth, since it relied on frail
human reason rather than on the revelation of the Quran.
Partly in response to al-Ghazali’s attacks, twelfth-century Muslim philosophers
turned their attention more to Aristotle than to Plato. The most notable figure in this
development was Ibn Rushd (1126–1198), qadi of Seville in the caliphate of Córdoba, who followed Aristotle in seeking to articulate a purely rational understanding
of the world. Ibn Rushd’s work not only helped to shape Islamic philosophy but also

Greek Influences
on Islam

369

ben06937.Ch14_344-373.qxd

370

PART III |

8/27/07

8:19 AM

Page 370

The Postclassical Era, 500 to 1000 C.E.

found its way to the schools and universities of western Europe, where Christian scholars knew Ibn Rushd as Averroes. During the thirteenth century his work profoundly
influenced the development of scholasticism, the effort of medieval European philosophers to harmonize Christianity with Aristotelian thought.
Ibn Rushd’s reliance on natural reason went too far for many Muslims, who
placed more value on the revelations of the Quran than on the fruits of human logic.
After the thirteenth century, Muslim philosophers and theologians who dominated
the madrasas drew inspiration more from Islamic sources than from Greek philosophy. Platonic and Aristotelian influences did not disappear, but they lost favor in official seats of learning and fell increasingly under the shadow of teachings from the
Quran and Sufi mystics. As they did with political and cultural traditions from Persia
and India, Muslim thinkers absorbed Greek philosophy, reconsidered it, and used it
to advance the interests of their society.
Quite apart from philosophy, Greek mathematics, science, and medicine also appealed strongly to Muslims. Like their Indian counterparts, scholars in classical Greek
and Hellenistic societies had developed elaborate traditions of scientific thought.
Greek mathematics did not make use of Indian numerals, but it offered a solid body
of powerful reasoning, particularly when dealing with calculations in algebra and
geometry. Greek mathematics supported the development of astronomical and geographical scholarship, and studies of anatomy and physiology served as foundations
for medical thought. Muslim scholars quickly absorbed those Greek traditions, combined them with influences from India, and used them all as points of departure for
their studies. The result was a brilliant flowering of mathematical, scientific, and medical scholarship that provided Muslim societies with powerful tools for understanding the natural world.

T

he prophet Muhammad did not intend to found a new religion. Instead, his intention
was to express his faith in Allah and perfect the teachings of earlier Jewish and Chris-

tian prophets by announcing a revelation more comprehensive than those Allah had
entrusted to his predecessors. His message soon attracted a circle of devout and committed disciples, and by the time of his death most of Arabia had accepted Islam, the faith
founded on the individual’s submission to Allah and his will. During the two centuries following the prophet’s death, Arab conquerors spread Islam throughout southwest Asia
and north Africa and introduced their faith to central Asia, India, the Mediterranean
islands, and Iberia. This rapid expansion of Islam encouraged the development of an extensive trade and communication network: merchants, diplomats, and other travelers
moved easily throughout the Islamic world exchanging goods and introducing agricultural crops to new lands. Rapid expansion also led to encounters between Islam and longestablished religious and cultural traditions such as Hinduism, Judaism, Zoroastrianism,
Christianity, Persian literature and political thought, and classical Greek philosophy and
science. Muslim rulers built a society that made a place for those of different faiths, and
Muslim thinkers readily adapted earlier traditions to their needs. As a result of its expansion, its extensive trade and communication networks, and its engagement with other religious and cultural traditions, the dar al-Islam became one of the most prosperous and
cosmopolitan societies of the postclassical world.

ben06937.Ch14_344-373.qxd

8/27/07

8:19 AM

Page 371

CHAPTER 14 |

The Expansive Realm of Islam

371

C H R O N O L O G Y
570–632

Life of Muhammad

622

The hijra

632

Muhammad’s hajj

650s

Compilation of the Quran

661–750

Umayyad dynasty

750–1258

Abbasid dynasty

786–809

Reign of Harun al-Rashid

1050s

Establishment of Saljuq control over the Abbasid dynasty

1058–1111

Life of al-Ghazali

1126–1198

Life of Ibn Rushd

F O R

F U R T H E R

R E A D I N G

Muhammad Manazir Ahsan. Social Life under the Abbasids. New
York, 1979. Draws on a wide range of sources in discussing
dress, food, drink, housing, and daily life during the Abbasid era.
Jonathan P. Berkey. The Formation of Islam: Religion and Society
in the Near East, 600–1800. Cambridge, 2003. Views the
development of Islamic society in the context of relations between Muslims, Jews, and Christians.
Jonathan M. Bloom. Paper before Print: The History and Impact
of Paper in the Islamic World. New Haven, 2001. Fascinating
study exploring the production and uses of paper in the
Islamic world before the adoption of printing technology.
Richard W. Bulliet. The Camel and the Wheel. New York, 1990.
Fascinating study of the domestication of camels and transportation technologies based on camels.
Michael Cook. Muhammad. Oxford, 1983. A brief and accessible
biography highlighting Muhammad’s devout monotheism.
Fred McGraw Donner. The Early Islamic Conquests. Princeton,
1981. An important interpretation that emphasizes the
significance of political and religious unity for early Muslim
conquerors.
John Esposito. Islam: The Straight Path. 3rd ed. New York, 2005.
The best brief introduction to Islam.
Richard C. Foltz. Spirituality in the Land of the Noble: How Iran
Shaped the World’s Religions. Oxford, 2004. Includes an accessible discussion of Persian influences on the Islamic faith.

Abu Hamid Muhammad al-Ghazzali. The Alchemy of Happiness.
Trans. by Claude Field. Rev. by Elton L. Daniel. New York,
1991. Translation of one of the classic works of early Islamic
religious and moral thought.
Ahmad Y. al-Hassan and Donald R. Hill. Islamic Technology: An
Illustrated History. Cambridge, 1986. Thorough survey of
Islamic science and technology, with attention both to original inventions and to elements borrowed by Muslims from
other societies.
Mahmood Ibrahim. Merchant Capital and Islam. Austin, 1990.
Examines the role of trade in Arabia during Muhammad’s
time and in early Islamic society.
Salma Khadra Jayyusi, ed. The Legacy of Muslim Spain. Leiden,
1992. Important collection of scholarly essays on Muslim influences at the western end of the Islamic world.
Ira M. Lapidus. A History of Islamic Societies. Cambridge, 1988.
Authoritative survey of Islamic history, concentrating on social and cultural issues.
Ilse Lichtenstadter. Introduction to Classical Arabic Literature.
New York, 1974. A brief overview, accompanied by an extensive selection of texts in English translation.
M. Lombard. The Golden Age of Islam. Princeton, 2004. Concentrates on the social and economic history of the Abbasid period.
William H. McNeill and Marilyn R. Waldman, eds. The Islamic
World. New York, 1973. An excellent collection of primary
sources in translation.

ben06937.Ch14_344-373.qxd

372

PART III |

8/27/07

8:19 AM

Page 372

The Postclassical Era, 500 to 1000 C.E.

F. E. Peters. The Hajj: The Muslim Pilgrimage to Mecca and the
Holy Places. Princeton, 1994. Draws on scores of travelers’
reports in studying the Muslim practice through the ages of
making a pilgrimage to Mecca.
———. Muhammad and the Origins of Islam. Albany, 1994. Excellent introduction to Muhammad’s life and thought and
the early days of his movement.
Al Qur’an: A Contemporary Translation. Trans. by Ahmed Ali. Princeton, 1984. A sensitive translation of the holy book of Islam.
Francis Robinson, ed. The Cambridge Illustrated History of the Islamic World. Cambridge, 1996. An excellent and lavishly illustrated introduction to Islam and the Muslim world.
Maxime Rodinson. Islam and Capitalism. Trans. by B. Pearce.
New York, 1973. An influential volume that examines Islamic
teachings on economic matters as well as economic practice
in the Muslim world.

Ronald Segal. Islam’s Black Slaves: The Other Black Diaspora.
New York, 2001. A highly readable study of slavery in Islamic
society.
Andrew M. Watson. Agricultural Innovation in the Early Islamic
World: The Diffusion of Crops and Farming Techniques,
700–1100. Cambridge, 1983. Important scholarly study of
the diffusion of food and industrial crops throughout the
early Islamic world.
Michael Wolfe, ed. One Thousand Roads to Mecca: Ten Centuries
of Travelers Writing about the Muslim Pilgrimage. New York,
1997. Presents selections from twenty-three accounts describing travelers’ hajj experiences.
Frances Wood. The Silk Road: Two Thousand Years in the Heart
of Asia. Berkeley, 2002. A brilliantly illustrated volume discussing the history of the silk roads from antiquity to the
twentieth century.

ben06937.Ch14_344-373.qxd

8/27/07

8:19 AM

Page 373


