Early African Societies
and the Bantu Migrations



Early Agricultural Society in Africa

Climatic Change and the Development
of Agriculture in Africa

Egypt and Nubia: “Gifts of the Nile”
The Unification of Egypt

Turmoil and Empire

The Formation of Complex Societies
and Sophisticated Cultural Traditions
The Emergence of Cities and Stratified Societies

Economic Specialization and Trade

Early Writing in the Nile Valley

The Development of Organized Religious Traditions

Bantu Migrations and Early Agricultural
Societies of Sub-Saharan Africa

The Dynamics of Bantu Expansion

Early Agricultural Societies of Sub-Saharan Africa

For almost three thousand years, Egyptian embalmers preserved the bodies of 
deceased indi-
viduals through a process of mummification. Egyptian records rarely mention the 
techniques
of mummification, but the Greek historian Herodotus traveled in Egypt about 450 
B.C.E. and
briefly explained the craft. The embalmer first used a metal hook to draw the 
brain of the de-
ceased out through a nostril and then removed the internal organs through an 
incision made
alongside the abdomen, washed them in palm wine, and sealed them with 
preservatives in
stone vessels. Next, the embalmer washed the body, filled it with spices and 
aromatics, and
covered it for about two months with natron, a naturally occurring salt 
substance. When the
natron had extracted all moisture from the body, the embalmer cleansed it again 
and wrapped
it with strips of fine linen covered with resin. Adorned with jewelry, the 
preserved body then
went into a coffin bearing a painting or sculpted likeness of the deceased.

Careful preservation of the body was only a part of the funerary ritual for 
prominent Egyp-
tians. Ruling elites, wealthy individuals, and sometimes common people as well 
laid their de-
ceased to rest in expensive tombs equipped with furniture, tools, weapons, and 
ornaments
that the departed would need in their next lives. Relatives periodically 
brought food and wine
to nourish the deceased, and archaeologists have discovered soups, beef ribs, 
pigeons, quail,
fish, bread, cakes, and fruits among those offerings. Artists decorated some 
tombs with ele-
gant paintings of family members and servants, whose images accompanied the 
departed
into a new dimension of existence.

Egyptian funerary customs were reflections of a prosperous agricultural 
society. Food of-
ferings consisted mostly of local agricultural products, and scenes painted on 
tomb walls
often depicted workers preparing fields or cultivating crops. Moreover, 
bountiful harvests ex-
plained the accumulation of wealth that supported elaborate funerary practices, 
and they
also enabled some individuals to devote their efforts to specialized tasks such 
as embalming.
Agriculture even influenced religious beliefs. Many Egyptians believed 
fervently in a life be-
yond the grave, and they likened the human experience of life and death to the 
agricultural
cycle in which crops grow, die, and come to life again in another season.

As Mesopotamians built a productive agricultural society in southwest Asia and 
as Indo-
European peoples introduced domesticated horses to much of Eurasia, cultivation 
and herding
also transformed African societies. African agriculture first took root in the 
Sudan, then moved
into the Nile River valley and also to most parts of sub-Saharan Africa. 
Agriculture flourished
particularly in the fertile Nile valley, and abundant harvests soon supported 
fast-growing popu-
lations. That agricultural bounty underwrote the development of Egypt, the most 
prosperous

O P P O S I T E :  A manuscript painting from about 1000 B.C.E. depicts Anubis, 
the jackal-headed

Egyptian god of mummification, tending to a mummy before a sepulchral pyramid.  
                                                                        59


60          P A R T    I    |  The Early Complex Societies, 3500 to 500 B.C.E.

and powerful of the early agricultural societies in Africa, and also of Nubia, 
Egypt’s neighbor
to the south.

Distinctive Egyptian and Nubian societies began to take shape in the valley of 
the Nile
River during the late fourth millennium B.C.E., shortly after the emergence of 
complex society
in Mesopotamia. Like their Mesopotamian counterparts, Egyptians and Nubians 
drew on agri-
cultural surpluses to organize formal states, support specialized laborers, and 
develop distinc-
tive cultural traditions. Like Mesopotamians again, Egyptian and Nubian 
residents of the Nile
valley had regular dealings with peoples from other societies. They drew 
inspiration for polit-
ical and social organization both from Mesopotamia and from their African 
neighbors to the
south. They also traded actively with Mesopotamians, Phoenicians, Africans, and 
others as
well. Political and economic competition sometimes led to military conflicts 
with peoples of
other societies: on several occasions when they enjoyed great wealth and power, 
both Egyp-
tians and Nubians embarked on campaigns of imperial conquest, but when their 
power
waned, they found themselves intermittently under attack from the outside.

Indeed, like their counterparts in Mesopotamia, Egyptian and Nubian societies 
developed
from their earliest days in a larger world of interaction and exchange. Just as 
Mesopotami-
ans, Hittites, Hebrews, and Phoenicians influenced one another in southwest 
Asia, inhabi-
tants of the Nile valley mixed and mingled with Mesopotamians, Phoenicians, and 
other
peoples from the eastern Mediterranean, southwest Asia, and sub-Saharan Africa. 
Just as
Indo-European peoples migrated to new lands and established communities that 
transformed
much          of Eurasia, Bantu peoples migrated from their original homeland 
in west Africa and es-
tablished settlements that brought profound change to much of sub-Saharan 
Africa. By no
means were Egypt and Nubia isolated centers of social development. Like 
Mesopotamia,
Egypt in particular was a spectacularly prosperous society, but like 
Mesopotamia again, Egypt
was only one part of a much larger world of interacting societies.

Early Agricultural Society in Africa

Egypt was the most prominent of early African societies, but it was by no means 
the
only agricultural society, nor even the only complex, city-based society of 
ancient Africa.
On the contrary, Egypt emerged alongside Nubia and other agricultural societies 
in
sub-Saharan Africa. Indeed, agricultural crops and domesticated animals reached 
Egypt
from sub-Saharan Africa by way of Nubia as well as from southwest Asia. 
Favorable geo-
graphic conditions enabled Egyptians to build an especially productive 
agricultural
economy that supported a powerful state, while Nubia became home to a somewhat
less prosperous but nonetheless sophisticated society. After taking shape as 
distinctive
societies, Egypt had regular dealings with both eastern Mediterranean and 
southwest
Asian peoples, and Nubia linked Egypt and the eastern Mediterranean basin with 
the
peoples and societies of sub-Saharan Africa.

Climatic Change and the
Development of Agriculture in Africa

African agriculture emerged in the context of gradual but momentous changes in 
cli-
matic conditions. About 10,000 B.C.E., after the end of the last ice age, the 
area now
occupied by the Sahara desert was mostly a grassy steppe land with numerous 
lakes,
rivers, and streams. Climatic and geographic conditions were much like those of 
the
Sudan region—not the modern state of Sudan but, rather, the extensive transition
zone of savanna and grassland that stretches across the African continent 
between the


C H A P T E R    3   |  Early African Societies and the Bantu Migrations        
   61


Sahara to the north and the tropical rain forest to the south. Grasses and 
cattle flour-
ished in that environment. Many human inhabitants of the region lived by hunting
wild cattle and collecting wild grains, while others subsisted on fish and 
aquatic re-
sources from the region’s waters.

After about 9000 B.C.E., peoples of the eastern Sudan domesticated cattle and 
be-
came nomadic herders, while they continued to collect wild grains. After 7500 
B.C.E.
they established permanent settlements and began to cultivate sorghum, a grain 
still
widely grown in the contemporary world for human and animal consumption. Mean-
while, after about 8000 B.C.E., inhabitants of the western Sudan began to 
cultivate
yams in the region between the Niger and Congo rivers. Sudanic agriculture 
became
increasingly diverse over the following centuries: sheep and goats arrived from 
south-
west   Asia after 7000 B.C.E., and Sudanic peoples began to cultivate gourds, 
water-
melons, and cotton after 6500 B.C.E.

Agricultural productivity enabled Sudanic peoples to organize small-scale 
states.
By about 5000 B.C.E. many Sudanic peoples had formed small monarchies ruled by
kings who were viewed as divine or semidivine beings. For several thousand 
years,
when Sudanic peoples buried their deceased kings, they also routinely executed a
group of royal servants and entombed them along with the king so that they could
continue to meet their master’s needs in another life. Sudanic peoples also 
developed
religious beliefs that reflected their agricultural society. They recognized a 
single di-
vine force as the source of good and evil, and they associated it with rain—a 
matter
of concern for any agricultural society.

After 5000 B.C.E. the northern half of Africa experienced a long-term climatic
change that profoundly influenced social organization and agriculture 
throughout the
region. Although there was considerable fluctuation, the climate generally 
became
much hotter and drier than before. The Sahara desert, which as late as 5000 
B.C.E. had
been cool and well watered enough to support human, animal, and vegetable life, 
be-
came increasingly arid and uninhabitable. This process of desiccation turned 
rich grass-
lands into barren desert, and it drove both humans and animals to more 
hospitable
regions. Many Sudanic cultivators and herders gathered around remaining bodies 
of
water such as Lake Chad. Some moved south to the territory that is now northern
Uganda. Others congregated in the valley of the Nile River, the principal 
source of
water flowing through north Africa.

Fed by rain and snow in the high mountains of east Africa, the Nile, which is 
the
world’s longest river, courses some 6,695 kilometers (4,160 miles) from its 
source at
Lake Victoria to its outlet through the delta to the Mediterranean Sea. Each 
spring,
rain and melting snow swell the river, which surges north through the Sudan and
Egypt. Until the completion of the high dam at Aswan in 1968, the Nile’s accumu-
lated waters annually flooded the plains downstream. When the waters receded, 
they
left behind a layer of rich, fertile muck, and those alluvial deposits 
supported a re-
markably productive agricultural economy throughout the Nile River valley.

Egypt and Nubia: “Gifts of the Nile”

Agriculture transformed the entire Nile River valley, with effects that were 
most dra-
matic in Egypt. In ancient times, Egypt referred not to the territory embraced 
by the
modern state of Egypt but, rather, to the ribbon of land bordering the lower 
third of
the Nile between the Mediterranean and the river’s first cataract (an 
unnavigable
stretch of rapids and waterfalls) near Aswan. Egypt enjoyed a much larger 
floodplain
than most of the land to the south known as Nubia, the middle stretches of the 
Nile
valley between the river’s first and sixth cataracts. As the Sahara became 
increasingly

Early Sudanic
Agriculture

Climatic Change

The Nile River Valley


62          P A R T    I    |  The Early Complex Societies, 3500 to 500 B.C.E.


   Map 3.1        The Nile valley, 3000–2000 B.C.E.
Note the difference in size between the kingdom of
Egypt and the kingdom of Kush. What geographical
conditions favored the establishment of large states
north    of the first cataract of the Nile River?

Mediterranean Sea

Heliopolis

Tanis

Jericho

Dead  Sea 


LO W E R
E GYPT 

Giza
Memphis

SINAI

PENINSULA

Akhetaten

(Tell el-Amarna)


U PPE R
E GYPT 

Elephantine

First Cataract

Thebes
Aswan

Second Cataract


Third Cataract

NUBI A

Kerma


Egypt

Kingdom of Kush

Fourth Cataract

Napata

Fifth
Cataract

Meroë


0                              125

250 mi

Sixth Cataract

0                                       250                                  
500 km


Early Agriculture
in the Nile Valley

arid, cultivators flocked to the Nile valley and established societies that 
depended on
intensive agriculture. Because of their broad floodplains, Egyptians were able 
to take
better advantage of the Nile’s annual floods than the Nubians to the south, and 
they
turned Egypt into an especially productive agricultural region that was capable 
of sup-
porting a much larger population than were Nubian lands. Because of its 
prosperity,
the Greek historian Herodotus proclaimed Egypt the “gift of the Nile.” If he had
known more about Nubia, Herodotus might well have realized that it too was a 
gift
of the Nile, even if it was less prosperous.

Geography ensured that both Egypt and Nubia would come under the influence of
the Mediterranean basin to the north and sub-Saharan Africa to the south, since 
the
Nile River links the two regions. About 10,000 B.C.E., migrants from the Red 
Sea hills
in northern Ethiopia traveled down the Nile valley and introduced to Egypt and 
Nubia
the practice of collecting wild grains. They also introduced a language 
ancestral to
Coptic, the language of ancient Egypt, to the lower reaches of the Nile valley. 
After
5000 B.C.E., as the African climate grew hotter and drier, Sudanic cultivators 
and
herders moved down the Nile, introducing Egypt and Nubia to African crops such 
as
gourds and watermelons as well as animals domesticated in the Sudan, 
particularly cattle
and donkeys. About the same time, wheat and barley from Mesopotamia reached 
Egypt
and Nubia by traveling up the Nile from the Mediterranean.


C H A P T E R    3   |  Early African Societies and the Bantu Migrations        
   63


Both Egyptians and Nubians relied heavily on agriculture
at  least  by  5000  B.C.E.  Egyptian  cultivators  went  into  the
floodplains in the late summer, after the recession of the Nile’s
annual flood, sowed their seeds without extensive preparation
of  the  soil,  allowed  their  crops  to  mature  during  the  cool
months of the year, and harvested them during the winter and
early spring. With less extensive floodplains, Nubians relied
more on prepared fields and irrigation by waters diverted from
the Nile. As in Mesopotamia, high agricultural productivity
led to a rapid increase in population throughout the Nile val-
ley. Demographic pressures soon forced Egyptians in particu-
lar  to  develop  more  intense  and  sophisticated  methods  of
agriculture. Cultivators moved beyond the Nile’s immediate
floodplains and began to grow crops on higher ground that
required plowing and careful preparation. They built dikes to
protect their fields from floods and catchment basins to store
water for irrigation. By 4000 B.C.E. agricultural villages dotted
the Nile’s shores from the Mediterranean in the north to the
river’s fourth cataract in the south.

A painting from the tomb of a priest who lived
about the fifteenth century B.C.E. depicts agri-
cultural workers plowing and sowing crops in
southern Egypt.


As in Mesopotamia, dense human population in Egypt and Nubia brought a need

for formal organization of public affairs. Neither Egypt nor Nubia faced the 
external
dangers that threatened Mesopotamia, since the Red Sea, the Mediterranean Sea, 
and
hostile deserts discouraged foreign invaders in ancient times. Nevertheless, 
the need
to maintain order and organize community projects led both Egyptians and Nubians
to create states and recognize official authorities. By 4000 B.C.E. 
agricultural villages
along the Nile traded regularly with one another and cooperated in building 
irriga-
tion networks.

The earliest Egyptian and Nubian states were small kingdoms much like those in-
stituted in the Sudan after 5000 B.C.E. Indeed, it is likely that the notion of 
divine or
semidivine rulers reached Egypt and Nubia from the eastern and central Sudan, 
where
rulers had earlier founded small kingdoms to govern their agricultural and 
herding
communities. In any case, small kingdoms appeared first in southern Egypt and 
Nubia
after 4000 B.C.E. During the following centuries, residents living farther down 
the
Nile (to the north) founded similar states so that by 3300 B.C.E. small local 
kingdoms
organized public life throughout Egypt as well as Nubia. As in the earlier 
Sudanic
states, royal servants in these Nile kingdoms routinely accompanied deceased 
rulers to
their graves.

The Unification of Egypt

By 3500 B.C.E. political and economic competition fueled numerous skirmishes and
small-scale wars between the Nile kingdoms. Some kingdoms overcame their neigh-
bors and gradually expanded until they controlled sizable territories. One 
expansive
kingdom was Ta-Seti, a strong Nubian realm that flourished about 3400 to 3200 
B.C.E.
and extended its rule north of the Nile’s first cataract into Egypt. When 
Ta-Seti de-
clined, the local kingdoms of southern Egypt were in a strong position to 
increase
their power, since Egypt’s broad floodplains offered much more arable land and 
sup-
ported much larger populations than Nubian territories to the south.

After 3100 B.C.E. Egypt followed a path quite different from those of the 
smaller
Nubian kingdoms. Drawing on agricultural and demographic advantages, Egyptian
rulers forged all the territory between the Nile delta and the river’s first 
cataract into

Political Organization

Menes


64          P A R T    I    |  The Early Complex Societies, 3500 to 500 B.C.E.

Menes, unifier of Egypt, prepares to sacrifice
an enemy. He wears the crown of Upper
Egypt, and the falcon representing the god
Horus oversees his actions in this relief carv-
ing on a votive tablet. Two fallen enemies lie
at the bottom of the tablet.


The Archaic Period
and the Old Kingdom

Relations between
Egypt and Nubia

a  unified  kingdom  much  larger  and  more
powerful than any other Nile state. Tradition
holds that unified rule came to Egypt about
3100  B.C.E.  in  the  person  of  a  conqueror
named Menes (sometimes identified with an
early Egyptian ruler called Narmer). Menes was
an   ambitious   minor   official   from   southern
Egypt (known as Upper Egypt, since the Nile
flows north) who rose to power and extended his

authority  north  and  into  the  delta  (known  as
Lower  Egypt).  According  to  tradition,  Menes
founded the city of Memphis, near modern Cairo,
which  stood  at  the  junction  of  Upper  and  Lower
Egypt. Memphis served as Menes’ capital and eventu-

ally became the cultural as well as the political center of ancient Egypt.

Menes and his successors built a centralized state ruled by the pharaoh, the 
Egyp-
tian king. The early pharaohs claimed to be gods living on the earth in human 
form,
the owners and absolute rulers of all the land. In that respect, they continued 
the tradi-
tion of divine kingship inherited from the early agricultural societies of the 
Sudan. In-
deed, as late as 2600 B.C.E., deceased pharaohs took royal servants with them 
to the
grave. Egyptians associated the early pharaohs with Horus, the sky god, and 
they often
represented the pharaohs together with a falcon or a hawk, the symbol of Horus. 
Later
they viewed rulers as offspring of Amon, a sun god, so that the pharaoh was a 
son of
the sun. They considered the ruling pharaoh a human sun overseeing affairs on 
the
earth, just as Amon was the sun supervising the larger cosmos, and they 
believed that
after his death the pharaoh actually merged with Amon. Artistic representations 
also
depict pharaohs as enormous figures towering over their human subjects.

The power of the pharaohs was greatest during the first millennium of Egyptian
history—the eras known as the Archaic Period (3100–2660 B.C.E.) and the Old 
King-
dom (2660–2160 B.C.E.). The most enduring symbols of their authority and divine
status are the massive pyramids constructed during the Old Kingdom as royal 
tombs,
most of them during the century from 2600 to 2500 B.C.E. These enormous monu-
ments stand today at Giza, near Cairo, as testimony to the pharaohs’ ability to 
mar-
shal Egyptian resources. The largest is the pyramid of Khufu (also known as 
Cheops),
which involved the precise cutting and fitting of 2.3 million limestone blocks 
weigh-
ing up to 15 tons, with an average weight of 2.5 tons. Scholars estimate that 
con-
struction of Khufu’s pyramid required the services of some eighty-four thousand
laborers working eighty days per year (probably during the late fall and 
winter, when
the demand for agricultural labor was light) for twenty years. Apart from the 
labor-
ers, hundreds of architects, engineers, craftsmen, and artists also contributed 
to the
construction of the pyramids.

Even after the emergence of the strong pharaonic state that took Egypt on a path
different from those followed by other Nile societies, the fortunes of Egypt 
and Nubia


C H A P T E R    3   |  Early African Societies and the Bantu Migrations        
   65

Funerary sculpture from a tomb in Upper Egypt dating from about 2200–2000 
B.C.E. depicts Nenu, a Nubian mercenary
soldier who served in the Egyptian army, together with his Egyptian wife, their 
two sons, a servant, and two pet dogs.


remained closely intertwined. Egyptians had strong interests in Nubia for both 
politi-
cal and commercial reasons: they were wary of Nubian kingdoms that might 
threaten
Upper Egypt, and they desired products such as gold, ivory, ebony, and precious
stones that were available only from southern lands. Meanwhile, Nubians had 
equally
strong interests in Egypt: they wanted to protect their independence from their 
large
and powerful neighbor to the north, and they sought to profit by controlling 
trade
down the Nile.

Tensions led to frequent violence between Egypt and Nubia throughout the Ar-
chaic Period and the Old Kingdom. The early pharaohs organized at least five 
military
campaigns to Nubia between 3100 and 2600 B.C.E. Pharaonic forces destroyed the
Nubian kingdom of Ta-Seti soon after the unification of Egypt, leading to 
Egyptian
domination of Lower Nubia (the land between the first and second cataracts of 
the
Nile) for more than half a millennium, from about 3000 to 2400 B.C.E. That 
Egyptian
presence in the north forced Nubian leaders to concentrate their efforts at 
political or-
ganization farther to the south in Upper Nubia. By about 2500 B.C.E. they had 
estab-
lished a powerful kingdom, called Kush, with a capital at Kerma, about 700 
kilometers

The Early
Kingdom of Kush


66          P A R T    I    |  The Early Complex Societies, 3500 to 500 B.C.E.


The Middle Kingdom

The Hyksos

The New Kingdom

(435 miles) south of Aswan. Though not as powerful as united Egypt, the kingdom 
of
Kush was a formidable and wealthy state that dominated the upper reaches of the 
Nile
and occasionally threatened southern Egypt.

In spite of constant tension and frequent hostilities, numerous diplomats and 
ex-
plorers traveled from Egypt to Nubia in search of political alliances and 
commercial
relationships, and many Nubians sought improved fortunes in Egypt. Around 2300
B.C.E., for example, the Egyptian explorer Harkhuf made four expeditions to 
Nubia.
He returned from one of his trips with a caravan of some three hundred donkeys 
bear-
ing exotic products from tropical Africa, as well as a dancing dwarf, and his 
cargo
stimulated Egyptian desire for trade with southern lands. Meanwhile, Nubian 
peoples
looked for opportunities to pursue in Egypt. By the end of the Old Kingdom, 
Nubian
mercenaries were quite prominent in Egyptian armies. Indeed, they often married
Egyptian women and assimilated into Egyptian society.

Turmoil and Empire

Toward the end of the Old Kingdom, high agricultural productivity made several 
re-
gions  of  Egypt  so  prosperous  and  powerful  that  they  were  able  to  
ignore  the
pharaohs and pursue local interests. As a result, the central state declined 
and even-
tually disappeared altogether during a long season of political upheaval and 
social
unrest (2160–2040 B.C.E.). Pharaonic authority returned with the establishment 
of
the Middle Kingdom (2040–1640 B.C.E.). Pharaohs of the Middle Kingdom were
not as powerful as their predecessors of the Old Kingdom, but they effectively 
stabi-
lized Egypt and supervised relations with neighboring lands of Nubia, north 
Africa,
and Syria.

Gradually, however, Egypt came under the pressure of foreign peoples from south-
west Asia, particularly a Semitic people whom Egyptians called the Hyksos 
(“foreign
rulers”). Little information survives about the Hyksos, but it is clear that 
they were
horse-riding nomads. Indeed, they probably introduced horses to Egypt, and their
horse-drawn chariots, which they learned about from Hittites and Mesopotamians,
provided them with a significant military advantage over Egyptian forces. They 
en-
joyed an advantage also in their weaponry: the Hyksos used bronze weapons and
bronze-tipped arrows, whereas Egyptians relied mostly on wooden weapons and ar-
rows      with stone heads. About 1674 B.C.E. the Hyksos captured Memphis and 
levied
tribute throughout Egypt. The Hyksos themselves probably did not often travel 
south
of the Nile delta in large numbers, but they claimed authority over the whole 
of Egypt
and ruled the land through Egyptian intermediaries.

Hyksos rule provoked a strong reaction especially in Upper Egypt, where disgrun-
tled nobles organized revolts against the foreigners. They adopted horses and 
chariots
for their own military forces. They also equipped their troops with bronze 
weapons.
Working from Thebes and later from Memphis, Egyptian leaders gradually pushed 
the
Hyksos out of the Nile delta and founded a powerful state known as the New King-
dom (1550–1070 B.C.E.).

Pharaohs of the New Kingdom presided over a prosperous and productive society.
Agricultural surpluses supported a population of perhaps four million people as 
well as
an      army and an elaborate bureaucracy that divided responsibilities among 
different of-
fices. One department oversaw the court and royal estates, for example, while 
others
dealt with military forces, state-recognized religious cults, the treasury, 
agricultural af-

                                             fairs, local government, and the 
administration of conquered territories. Pharaohs of


Hyksos  (HICK-sohs)

the New Kingdom did not build enormous pyramids as did their predecessors of 
the


C H A P T E R    3   |  Early African Societies and the Bantu Migrations        
   67

Sources from the Past

Harkhuf ’s Expeditions to Nubia

Many Egyptians wrote brief autobiographies that they or their descendants had 
carved into their tombs. One of the most
famous autobiographies from the Old Kingdom is that of Harkhuf, a royal 
official who became governor of Upper Egypt
before 2300 B.C.E. The inscriptions in his tomb mention his four expeditions to 
Nubia to seek valuable items and report
on political conditions there. The inscriptions also include the text of a 
letter from the boy-pharaoh Neferkare expressing
his appreciation for Harkhuf’s fourth expedition and his desire to see the 
dancing dwarf that Harkhuf brought back
from Nubia.


The majesty of [Pharaoh] Mernere, my lord, sent me to-
gether with my father . . . to [the Upper Nubian king-
dom of ] Yam to open the way to that country. I did it
in seven months; I brought from it all kinds of beautiful
and rare gifts, and was praised for it greatly.

His majesty sent me a second time alone.        I came

down  [the  Nile]  bringing  gifts  from  that  country  in
great quantity, the likes of which had never before been
brought back to this land [Egypt]. . . .

Then his majesty sent me a third time to Yam.        I

came down with three hundred donkeys laden with in-
cense, ebony,        panther skins, elephant’s tusks, throw

sticks, and all sorts of good products.

[The letter of Pharaoh Neferkare to Harkhuf:] No-
tice has been taken of this dispatch of yours which you
made for the King at the Palace, to let one know that
you have come down in safety from Yam with the army
that was with you. You have said in this dispatch of yours
that you have brought all kinds of great and beautiful
gifts.        You have said in this dispatch of yours that you

have brought a pygmy of the god’s dances from the land
of the horizon-dwellers [the region of Nubia southeast
of Egypt], like the pygmy whom the [royal official] Baw-
erded brought from Punt [Ethiopia and Somalia] in the
time of King Isesi. You have said to my majesty that his
like has never been brought by anyone who [visited]
Yam previously.

Truly you know how to do what your lord loves and
praises. Truly you spend day and night planning to do
what  your  lord  loves,  praises,  and  commands.  His
majesty will provide you many worthy honors for the
benefit of your son’s son for all time, so that all people

will say, when they hear what my majesty did for you:
“Does anything equal what was done for the sole com-
panion Harkhuf when he came down from Yam, on ac-
count of the vigilance he showed in doing what his lord
loved, praised, and commanded?”

Come north to the residence at once! Hurry and
bring with you this pygmy whom you brought from the
land of the horizon-dwellers live, hale, and healthy, for
the dances of the god, to gladden the heart, to delight
the heart of King Neferkare who lives forever! When he
goes down with you into the ship, get worthy men to
be around him on deck, lest he fall into the water! When
he lies down at night, get worthy men to lie around him
in his tent. Inspect ten times at night! My majesty de-
sires to see this pygmy more than the gifts of the mine-
land [the Sinai peninsula] and of Punt!

When you arrive at the residence and this pygmy is
with you live, hale, and healthy, my majesty will do great
things for you, more than was done for the [royal offi-
cial] Bawerded in the time of King Isesi, in accordance
with my majesty’s wish to see this pygmy. Orders have
been  brought  to  the  chief  of  the  new  towns  and  the
companion, overseer of priests to command that sup-
plies be furnished from what is under the charge of each
from every storage depot and every temple that has not
been exempted.

FOR FURTHER REFLECTION

How does Harkhuf’s autobiography illuminate early
Egyptian interest in Nubia and the processes by which
Egyptians of the Old Kingdom developed knowledge
about Nubia?

SOURCE: Miriam Lichtheim, ed. Ancient Egyptian Literature, 3 vols. Berkeley: 
University of California Press, 1973, 1: 25–27.


68          P A R T    I    |  The Early Complex Societies, 3500 to 500 B.C.E.


   Map 3.2      Imperial Egypt, 1400 B.C.E. Compare
the territory ruled by the New Kingdom with the earlier
kingdom of Egypt as represented in Map 3.1. Why was
the New Kingdom able to expand so dramatically to the
north and south? Why did it not expand also to the east
and west?

0                                 250

0                                          500

500

1000

750 mi

1500 km


Aegean
Sea

ANATOLIA


CRETE                             CYPRUS

SYRIA


a

LOWER EGYPT

Giza
Memphis

Akhetaten
(Tell el-Amarna)

Tanis
Heliopolis

Sinai

Peninsula

Jericho

Dead Sea

ARABIA


UPPER EGYPT

Thebes


SAHARA
DESERT

Elephantine   Aswan

First Cataract
Second Cataract


Third Cataract

NUBIA

Kerma


Napata

Fourth Cataract

Fifth Cataract


Sixth Cataract

Meroë

Hittite empire

Egyptian empire (New Kingdom)


Egyptian Imperialism

Old Kingdom, but they erected numerous temples, palaces, and monumental statues
to advertise their power and authority.

Pharaohs of the New Kingdom also worked to extend Egyptian authority well be-
yond the Nile valley and the delta. After expelling the Hyksos, they sought to 
prevent
new invasions by seizing control of regions that might pose threats in the 
future. Most
vigorous  of  the  New  Kingdom  pharaohs  was  Tuthmosis  III  (reigned  
1479–1425
B.C.E.). After seventeen campaigns that he personally led to Palestine and 
Syria, Tuth-
mosis dominated the coastal regions of the eastern Mediterranean as well as 
north
Africa. Rulers of the New Kingdom also turned their attention to the south and 
re-
stored Egyptian dominance in Nubia. Campaigning as far south as the Nile’s fifth
cataract, Egyptian armies destroyed Kerma, the capital of the kingdom of Kush, 
and
crushed a series of small Nubian states that had arisen during the period of 
Hyksos
rule. Thus for half a millennium Egypt was an imperial power throughout much of 
the
eastern Mediterranean basin and southwest Asia as well as most of the Nile 
River valley.
After the New Kingdom, Egypt entered a long period of political and military
decline. Just as Hyksos rule provoked a reaction in Egypt, Egyptian rule 
provoked
reactions in the regions subdued by pharaonic armies. Local resistance drove 
Egyp-


C H A P T E R    3   |  Early African Societies and the Bantu Migrations        
   69

A wall painting from the tomb of an Egyptian imperial official in Nubia depicts 
a delegation of Nubians
bringing tribute in the forms of exotic beasts, animal skins, and rings of 
gold.


tian forces out of Nubia and southwest Asia, then Kushite and Assyrian armies 
in-
vaded Egypt itself.

By 1100 B.C.E. Egyptian forces were in full retreat from Nubia. After they 
vacated
the region, about the tenth century B.C.E., Nubian leaders organized a new 
kingdom
of Kush with a capital at Napata, located just below the Nile’s fourth 
cataract. By the
eighth century B.C.E., rulers of this revived kingdom of Kush were powerful 
enough
to invade Egypt, which at the time was in the grip of religious and factional 
disputes.
King Kashta conquered Thebes about 760 B.C.E. and founded a Kushite dynasty that
ruled Egypt for almost a century. Kashta’s successors consolidated Kushite 
authority
in Upper Egypt, claimed the title of pharaoh, and eventually extended their 
rule to
the Nile delta and beyond.

Meanwhile,  as  Kushites  pushed  into  Egypt  from  the  south,  Assyrian  
armies
equipped with iron weapons bore down from the north. During the mid-seventh cen-
tury B.C.E., while building their vast empire, the Assyrians invaded Egypt, 
campaigned
as far south as Thebes, drove out the Kushites, and subjected Egypt to Assyrian 
rule.
After the mid-sixth century B.C.E., like Mesopotamia, Egypt fell to a series of 
foreign
conquerors  who  built  vast  empires  throughout  southwest  Asia  and  the  
eastern
Mediterranean region, including Egypt and north Africa.

The Formation of Complex Societies
and Sophisticated Cultural Traditions

As in Mesopotamia, cities and the congregation of dense populations encouraged 
the
emergence of specialized labor in the early agricultural societies of Africa. 
This devel-
opment was particularly noticeable in Egypt, but specialized labor was a 
prominent
feature also of societies in the southern reaches of the Nile River valley. 
Clearly defined
social classes emerged throughout the Nile valley, and both Egyptians and 
Nubians

The Revived
Kingdom of Kush


70          P A R T    I    |  The Early Complex Societies, 3500 to 500 B.C.E.


Cities of the

Nile Valley: Egypt

Cities of the

Nile Valley: Nubia

Social Classes

built patriarchal societies that placed authority largely in the hands of adult 
males. The
Egyptian economy was especially productive, and because of both its prosperity 
and its
geographic location, Egypt figured as a center of trade, linking lands in 
southwest Asia,
the eastern Mediterranean, and sub-Saharan Africa. Meanwhile, like southwest 
Asia,
the Nile valley was a site of sophisticated cultural development. Writing 
systems ap-
peared in both Egypt and Nubia, and writing soon became a principal medium of 
liter-
ary expression and religious reflection as well as a means for preserving 
governmental
records and commercial information.

The Emergence of Cities and Stratified Societies

Cities were not as prominent in early societies of the Nile River valley as 
they were in
ancient Mesopotamia. In the Nile valley, populations clustered mostly in 
numerous agri-
cultural villages that traded regularly with their neighbors up and down the 
river. Never-
theless, several major cities emerged and guided affairs in both Egypt and 
Nubia. The
conqueror Menes founded Memphis as early as 3100 B.C.E. Because of its location 
at
the head of the Nile delta, Memphis was a convenient site for a capital: Menes 
and many
later pharaohs as well ruled over a unified Egypt from Memphis. Besides the 
capital,
other cities also played important roles in Egyptian affairs. Thebes, for 
example, was a
prominent political center even before the unification of Egypt. After 
unification, Thebes
became the administrative center of Upper Egypt, and several pharaohs even took 
the
city as their capital. Heliopolis, meaning “City of the Sun,” was the 
headquarters of a
sun cult near Memphis and a principal cultural center of ancient Egypt. Founded 
about
2900 B.C.E., Heliopolis reached the height of its influence during the New 
Kingdom,
when it was the site of an enormous temple to the sun god Re. Yet another 
important
city was Tanis on the Nile delta. At least by the time of the Middle Kingdom, 
and per-
haps even earlier, Tanis was a bustling port and Egypt’s gateway to the 
Mediterranean.
Nubian cities are not as well known as those of Egypt, but written records and 
ar-
chaeological excavations both make it clear that powerful and prosperous cities 
emerged
in the southern Nile valley as well as in Egypt. The most prominent Nubian 
cities of an-
cient times were Kerma, Napata, and Meroë. Kerma, located just above the Nile’s 
third
cataract, was the capital of the earliest kingdom of Kush. For a millennium 
after its foun-
dation about 2500 B.C.E., Kerma dominated both river and overland routes between
Egypt to the north and Sudanic regions to the south. The fortunes of Kerma waxed
and waned as Egypt and Kush contested each other for power in Nubia, but it 
remained
an influential site until its destruction about 1450 B.C.E. by the aggressive 
armies of
Egypt’s expansive New Kingdom. About the tenth century B.C.E., Napata emerged as
the new political center of Nubia. Located just below the Nile’s fourth 
cataract, Napata
was more distant from Egypt than Kerma and hence less vulnerable to threats 
from the
north. After King Kashta and his successors conquered Egypt, Napata enjoyed 
tremen-
dous prosperity because of the wealth that flowed up the Nile to the Kushite 
capital.
About  the  middle  of  the  seventh  century  B.C.E.,  after  Assyrian  forces 
 expelled  the
Kushites and asserted imperial control in Egypt, the capital of Kush moved 
farther south,
this time to Meroë, located between the Nile’s fifth and sixth cataracts about 
1,600
kilometers (1,000 miles) from the southern border of Egypt. Meroë presided over 
a
flourishing kingdom of Kush that enjoyed great prosperity because of its 
participation in

Nile trade networks until its gradual decline after about 100 C.E.

In Egypt and Nubia alike, ancient cities were centers of considerable 
accumulated
wealth, which encouraged the development of social distinctions and 
hierarchies. Like
the  Mesopotamians,  ancient  Egyptians  recognized  a  series  of  
well-defined  social
classes. Egyptian peasants and slaves played roles in society similar to those 
of their


C H A P T E R    3   |  Early African Societies and the Bantu Migrations        
   71

Building pyramids and other large structures involved heavy work, especially by 
the less privileged classes.
Here an Egyptian manuscript painting produced about 1000 B.C.E. depicts a 
supervisor overseeing a group
of laborers as they drag a sled loaded with building blocks.


Mesopotamian counterparts: they supplied the hard labor that made complex 
agricul-
tural society possible. The organization of the ruling classes, however, 
differed consid-
erably between Mesopotamia and Egypt. Instead of a series of urban kings, as in
Mesopotamia, Egyptians recognized the pharaoh as a supreme central ruler. 
Because
the   pharaoh was theoretically an absolute ruler, Egyptian society had little 
room for a
noble class like that of Mesopotamia. Instead of depending on nobles who owed 
their
positions to their birth, Egypt relied on professional military forces and an 
elaborate
bureaucracy of administrators and tax collectors who served the central 
government.
Thus,     in Egypt much more than in Mesopotamia, individuals of common birth 
could
attain high positions in society through government service.

Surviving information illuminates Egyptian society much better than Nubian, but
it is clear that Nubia also was the site of a complex, hierarchical society in 
ancient times.
Meroë, for example, was home to government officials, priests, craftsmen, 
merchants,
laborers, and slaves. Cemeteries associated with Nubian cities clearly reveal 
social and
economic distinctions. Tombs of wealthy and powerful individuals were often 
elabo-
rate structures—comfortable dwelling places tastefully decorated with paintings 
and
filled with expensive goods such as gold jewelry, gems, fine furniture, and 
abundant
supplies of food. In keeping with the ancient traditions of Sudanic kingship, 
many royal
tombs became the final resting places also of servants ritually executed so 
that they
could tend to the needs of their master in death. Graves of commoners were much
simpler, although they usually contained jewelry, pottery, personal ornaments, 
and
other goods to accompany the departed.

Like their Mesopotamian counterparts, both Egyptian and Nubian peoples built pa-
triarchal societies that vested authority over public and private affairs in 
their men.
Women of upper elite classes oversaw the domestic work of household servants. 
Below
the level of the upper elites, even in wealthy households, women routinely 
performed
domestic work, which included growing vegetables, grinding grain, baking bread, 
brew-
ing beer, spinning thread, and weaving textiles. Elite men enjoyed comfortable 
posi-
tions as scribes or government officials, while men of lower classes worked as 
agricultural
laborers, potters, carpenters, craftsmen, or fishermen. Both men and women were 
able

Patriarchal Society


72          P A R T    I    |  The Early Complex Societies, 3500 to 500 B.C.E.


Bronze Metallurgy

Iron Metallurgy

to accumulate property, including slaves, and pass wealth along to their 
children. Men
alone, however, were the governors of households and the larger society as a 
whole.
With rare exceptions men were the rulers in both Egyptian and Nubian states, 
and deci-
sions about government policies and public affairs rested mostly in men’s 
hands.

Yet women made their influence felt in ancient Egyptian and Nubian societies 
much
more than in contemporary Mesopotamia. In Egypt, women of the royal family fre-
quently served as regents for young rulers. Many royal women also used their 
status to
influence policy, sometimes going so far as to participate in plots to 
manipulate affairs
in  favor of their sons or even in palace rebellions seeking to unseat a 
pharaoh. In one
notable case, a woman took power as pharaoh herself: Queen Hatshepsut (reigned
1473–1458 B.C.E.) served as coruler with her stepson Tuthmosis III. The notion 
of a
female ruler was unfamiliar and perhaps somewhat unsettling to many Egyptians. 
In an
effort to present her in unthreatening guise, a monumental statue of Queen 
Hatshep-
sut depicts her wearing the stylized beard traditionally associated with the 
pharaohs. In
Nubia, in contrast, there is abundant evidence of many women rulers in the 
kingdom
of Kush, particularly during the period when Meroë was the capital. Some ruled 
in
their own right, while others reigned jointly with male kings, and many 
governed also
in the capacity of a regent known as the kandake (root of the name Candace). 
Mean-
while, other women wielded considerable power as priestesses in the numerous 
reli-
gious  cults  observed  in  Egypt  and  Nubia.  A  few  women  also  obtained  
a  formal
education and worked as scribes who prepared administrative and legal documents 
for
governments and private parties.

Economic Specialization and Trade

With the formation of complex, city-based societies, peoples of the Nile valley 
were
able to draw on a rapidly expanding stock of human skills. Bronze metallurgy 
made its
way from Mesopotamia to both Egypt and Nubia, and Sudanic peoples independently
developed a technology of iron production that eventually spread to most parts 
of sub-
Saharan Africa. Pottery, textile manufacture, woodworking, leather production, 
stone-
cutting, and masonry all became distinct occupations in cities throughout the 
Nile
valley. Specialized labor and the invention of efficient transportation 
technologies en-
couraged the development of trade networks that linked the Nile valley to a much
larger world.

Nile societies were much slower than their Mesopotamian counterparts to adopt
metal  tools  and  weapons.  Whereas  the  production  of  bronze  flourished  
in  Meso-
potamia by 3000 B.C.E., use of bronze implements became widespread in Egypt only
after the seventeenth century B.C.E., when the Hyksos relied on bronze weapons 
to
impose  their  authority  on  the  Nile  delta.  After  expelling  the  Hyksos, 
 Egyptians
equipped their forces with bronze weapons, and the imperial armies of Tuthmosis 
and
other pharaohs of the New Kingdom carried up-to-date bronze weapons like those
used in Mesopotamia and neighboring lands. As in Mesopotamia, and other lands as
well, the high cost of copper and tin kept bronze out of the hands of most 
people.
Royal workshops closely monitored supplies of the valuable metal: officers 
weighed the
bronze tools issued to workers at royal tombs, for example, to ensure that 
craftsmen
did not shave slivers off them and divert expensive metal to personal uses.

Bronze was even less prominent in Nubian societies than in Egypt. Indeed, Nubia
produced little bronze, since the region was poor in copper and tin, and so 
relied on
imports from the north. During the centuries after 1000 B.C.E., however, the 
southern
Nile societies made up for their lack of bronze with the emergence of 
large-scale pro-
duction of iron. The Hittites had developed techniques for forging iron in 
Anatolia


C H A P T E R    3   |  Early African Societies and the Bantu Migrations        
   73

A wall painting produced about 1300 B.C.E. shows Egyptian goldsmiths fashioning 
jewelry
and decorative objects for elite patrons. Early experience with gold metallurgy 
prepared
craftsmen to work with bronze and iron when knowledge of those metals reached 
Egypt.


about 1300 B.C.E., but iron metallurgy in Africa arose independently from local 
experi-
mentation with iron ores, which are plentiful in sub-Saharan Africa. The 
earliest traces
of African iron production discovered by archaeologists date from about 900 
B.C.E. in
the Great Lakes region of east Africa (modern-day Burundi and Rwanda) and also 
on
the southern side of Lake Chad (in modern-day Cameroon). It is quite possible 
that
African peoples produced iron before 1000 B.C.E. From the Great Lakes region and
the Sudan, iron metallurgy quickly spread throughout most of sub-Saharan Africa.
Furnaces churned out iron implements both in Nubia and in west Africa at least 
by
500 B.C.E. Meroë in particular became a site of large-scale iron production. 
Indeed, ar-
chaeologists who excavated Meroë in the early twentieth century C.E. found 
enormous
mounds  of slag still remaining from ancient times.

Nile craftsmen also worked from the early days of agricultural society to 
devise effi-
cient means of transportation. Within Egypt, the Nile River greatly facilitated 
trans-
portation, and Egyptians traveled up and down the river before 3500 B.C.E. 
Because
the    Nile flows north, boats could ride the currents from Upper to Lower 
Egypt. Mean-
while, prevailing winds blow almost year-round from the north, so that by 
raising a
sail, boats could easily make their way upriver from Lower to Upper Egypt. Soon 
after
3000 B.C.E. Egyptians sailed beyond the Nile into the Mediterranean, and by 
about
2000 B.C.E. they had thoroughly explored the waters of the Red Sea, the Gulf of 
Aden,
and the western portion of the Arabian Sea. Egyptians also made use of 
Mesopotamian-
style wheeled vehicles for local transport, and they relied on donkey caravans 
for trans-
port between the Nile valley and ports on the Red Sea.

In Nubia, navigation on the Nile was less convenient than in Egypt because 
unnav-
igable cataracts made it necessary to transport goods overland before 
continuing on
the river. Moreover, sailing ships heading upriver found it difficult to 
negotiate a long
stretch of the Nile around the fourth cataract because winds blow the same 
direction
as the currents. Thus, although Nubian societies were able to make some use of 
the
Nile for purposes of transportation, they had to rely more than Egyptians on 
overland
transport by wheeled vehicles and donkey caravan.

In both Egypt and Nubia, specialized labor and efficient means of transportation
encouraged the development of long-distance trade. Egypt was in special need of 
trade
because the land enjoys few natural resources other than the Nile. Irregular 
exchanges
of goods between Egypt and Nubia took place in early times, perhaps 4000 B.C.E. 
or
even before. By the time of the Old Kingdom, trade flowed regularly between 
Egypt

Transportation

Trade Networks


74          P A R T    I    |  The Early Complex Societies, 3500 to 500 B.C.E.

A wooden model found in a tomb shows how Egyptians traveled up and down the 
Nile River.
Produced about 2000 B.C.E., this sculpture depicts a relatively small boat with 
a mast, sail,
rudder, and poles to push the vessel through shallow waters. Many wall and tomb 
paintings
confirm the accuracy of this model.

and Nubia. The cities of Aswan and Elephantine at the southern border of Egypt 
re-
flected that trade in their very names: Aswan took its name from the ancient 
Egyptian
word swene, meaning “trade,” and Elephantine owed its name to the large 
quantities of
elephant ivory that passed through it while traveling down the Nile from Nubia 
to
Egypt. Apart from ivory, exotic African goods such as ebony, leopard skins, 
ostrich feath-
ers, gemstones, gold, and slaves went down the Nile in exchange for pottery, 
wine,
honey, and finished products from Egypt. Among the most prized Egyptian exports
were fine linen textiles woven from the flax that flourished in the Nile valley 
as well as
high-quality decorative and ornamental objects such as boxes, furniture, and 
jewelry
produced by skilled artisans. Commerce linked Egypt and Nubia throughout ancient
times, even when tensions or hostilities complicated relations between the two 
societies.
Egyptian merchants looked north as well as south. They traded with Mesopotami-
ans as early as 3500 B.C.E., and after 3000 B.C.E. they were active throughout 
the
eastern Mediterranean basin. Egyptian commerce in the Mediterranean sometimes
involved enormous transfers of goods. Since Egypt has few trees, for example, 
all
wood came from abroad. Pharaohs especially prized aromatic cedar for their 
tombs,
and Egyptian ships regularly imported huge loads from Lebanon. One record of
about 2600 B.C.E. mentions an expedition of forty ships hauling cedar logs. In 
ex-


C H A P T E R    3   |  Early African Societies and the Bantu Migrations        
   75

Queen Hatshepsut’s fleet takes on cargo at Punt. Stevedores carry jars of 
aromatics and trees
with carefully wrapped roots onto the Egyptian vessels. In the bottom panel, 
ships loaded
with cargo prepare to depart.


change for cedar Egyptians offered gold, silver, linen textiles, leather goods, 
and
dried foods such as lentils.

After the establishment of the New Kingdom, Egyptians also traded through the
Red Sea and the Gulf of Aden with an east African land they called Punt—probably
modern-day Somalia and Ethiopia. From Punt they imported gold, ebony, ivory,
cattle, aromatics, and slaves. The tomb of Queen Hatshepsut bears detailed 
illustra-
tions of a trading expedition to Punt about 1450 B.C.E. Paintings in the tomb 
show
large Egyptian ships bearing jewelry, tools, and weapons to Punt and then 
loading
the exotic products of the southern land, including apes, monkeys, dogs, a 
panther,
and myrrh trees with their roots carefully bound in bags. Thus, as in southwest 
Asia,
specialization of labor and efficient technologies of transportation not only 
quick-
ened      the economies of complex societies in Egypt and Nubia but also 
encouraged
their interaction with peoples of distant lands.

Early Writing in the Nile Valley

Writing appeared in Egypt at least by 3200 B.C.E., possibly as a result of 
Mesopo-
tamian influence. As in Mesopotamia, the earliest Egyptian writing was 
pictographic,
but  Egyptians  soon  supplemented  their  pictographs  with  symbols  
representing
sounds and ideas. Early Greek visitors to Egypt marveled at the large and 
handsome
pictographs that adorned Egyptian monuments and buildings. Since the symbols
were particularly prominent on temples, the visitors called them hieroglyphs, 
from
two Greek words meaning “holy inscriptions.” Quite apart from monument inscrip-
tions, hieroglyphic writing survives also on sheets of papyrus, a paper-like 
material
fashioned from the insides of papyrus reeds, which flourish along the Nile 
River. The
hot,  dry climate of Egypt has preserved not only mummified bodies but also 
large
numbers of papyrus texts bearing administrative and commercial records as well 
as
literary and religious texts.

Hieroglyphic Writing


76          P A R T    I    |  The Early Complex Societies, 3500 to 500 B.C.E.


A painted limestone sculpture from the Old Kingdom
depicts an Egyptian scribe writing on papyrus.

Although    striking    and
dramatic,  hieroglyphs  were
also somewhat cumbersome.
Egyptians went to the trou-
ble of using hieroglyphs for
formal  writing  and  monu-
ment  inscriptions,  but  for
everyday  affairs  they  com-
monly relied on the hieratic
(“priestly”) script, a simpli-
fied,  cursive  form  of  hiero-
glyphs. Hieratic appeared in
the   early   centuries   of   the
third millennium B.C.E., and
Egyptians made extensive use
of  the  script  for  more  than
three  thousand  years,  from
about 2600 B.C.E. to 600 C.E.

Hieratic largely disappeared

after  the  middle  of  the  first
millennium C.E., when Egyp-
tians  adapted  the  Greek  al-
phabet to their language and
developed alphabetic scripts
known as the demotic (“pop-
ular”)  and  Coptic  (“Egypt-


Education

Meroitic Writing

ian”) scripts. Hieratic, demotic, and Coptic scripts all survive mostly in 
papyrus texts
but occasionally also in inscriptions.

Formal education and literacy brought handsome rewards in ancient Egypt. The
privileged life of a scribe comes across clearly in a short work known as “The 
Satire of
the Trades.” Written during the Middle Kingdom by a scribe exhorting his son to 
study
diligently, the work detailed all the miseries associated with eighteen 
different profes-
sions: metalsmiths stunk like fish; potters grubbed in the mud like pigs; 
fishermen ran
the risk of sudden death in the jaws of the Nile’s ferocious crocodiles. Only 
the scribe
led a comfortable, honorable, and dignified life.

Nubian peoples spoke their own languages, although many individuals were fully
conversant in Egyptian as well as their native tongues, but all early writing 
in Nubia
was Egyptian hieroglyphic writing. Indeed, over the centuries Egypt wielded 
great cul-
tural influence in Nubia, especially during times when Egyptian political and 
military
influence was strong in southern lands. Egyptian political and military 
officials often
erected monuments and inscribed them with accounts in hieroglyphics of their 
deeds
in Nubia. Similarly, Egyptian priests traveled regularly to Nubia, organized 
temples de-
voted to Egyptian gods, and promoted their beliefs in hieroglyphics. Egyptian 
influ-
ence was very strong in Nubia also during the eighth and seventh centuries 
B.C.E. when
the kings of Kush ruled Egypt as pharaohs and sponsored extensive trade, 
travel, and
communication between Egypt and Nubia.

Nubian inscriptions continued to appear in Egyptian hieroglyphic writing as 
late as
the first century C.E. After about the fifth century B.C.E., however, Egyptian 
cultural in-
fluence declined noticeably in Nubia. After the transfer of the Kushite capital 
from Na-
pata  to  Meroë,  Nubian  scribes  even  devised  an  alphabetic  script  for  
the  Meroitic


C H A P T E R    3   |  Early African Societies and the Bantu Migrations        
   77


language. They borrowed Egyptian hieroglyphs but used them to represent sounds
rather than ideas and so created a flexible writing system. Many Meroitic 
inscriptions
survive, both on monuments and on papyrus. To date, however, scholars have not
been able to understand Meroitic writing. Although they have ascertained the 
sound
values of the alphabet, the Meroitic language itself is so different from other 
known
languages that no one has been able to decipher Meroitic texts.

The Development of Organized Religious Traditions

Like their counterparts in other world regions, Egyptians and Nubians believed 
that
deities played prominent roles in the world and that proper cultivation of the 
gods was
an important community responsibility. The principal gods revered in ancient 
Egypt
were Amon and Re. Amon was originally a local Theban deity associated with the 
sun,
creation, fertility, and reproductive forces, and Re was a sun god worshiped at 
He-
liopolis. During the Old Kingdom and the Middle Kingdom, priests increasingly 
asso-
ciated  the  two  gods  with  each  other  and  honored  them  in  the  
combined  cult  of
Amon-Re. At Heliopolis, a massive temple complex supported priests who tended to
the    cult of Amon-Re and studied the heavens for astronomical purposes. When 
Egypt
became an imperial power during the New Kingdom, some devotees suggested that
Amon-Re might even be a universal god who presided over all the earth.

For a brief period the cult of Amon-Re faced a monotheistic challenge from the
god Aten, another deity associated with the sun. Aten’s champion was Pharaoh 
Amen-
hotep IV (reigned 1353–1335 B.C.E.), who changed his name to Akhenaten in honor
of his preferred deity. Akhenaten considered Aten the world’s “sole god, like 
whom
there is no other.” Thus, unlike the priests of Amon-Re, most of whom viewed 
their
god as one among many, Akhenaten and others devoted to Aten considered their 
deity
the one and only true god. Their faith represented one of the world’s earliest 
expres-
sions of monotheism—the belief that a single god rules over all creation.

Akhenaten built a new capital city called Akhetaten (“Horizon of Aten,” located 
at
modern Tell el-Amarna), where broad streets, courtyards, and open temples 
allowed
unobscured vision and constant veneration of the sun. He also dispatched agents 
to all
parts of Egypt with instructions to encourage the worship of Aten and to chisel 
out the
names of Amon, Re, and other gods from inscriptions on temples and public build-
ings. As long as Akhenaten lived, the cult of Aten flourished. But when the 
pharaoh
died, traditional priests mounted a fierce counterattack, restored the cult of 
Amon-Re
to privileged status, and nearly annihilated the worship and even the memory of 
Aten.
Whereas Mesopotamians believed with Gilgamesh that death brought an end to an
individual’s existence, many Egyptians believed that death was not an end so 
much as a
transition to a new dimension of existence. The yearning for immortality helps 
to ex-
plain the Egyptian practice of mummifying the dead. During the Old Kingdom, 
Egyp-
tians believed that only the ruling elites would survive the grave, so they 
mummified
only pharaohs and their close relatives. Later, however, other royal officials 
and wealthy
individuals merited the posthumous honor of mummification. During the Middle and
New Kingdoms, Egyptians came to think of eternal life as a condition available 
to nor-
mal mortals as well as to members of the ruling classes. By the time the Greek 
historian
Herodotus described the process of mummification in the fifth century B.C.E., 
many
wealthy families were able to help their deceased relatives attain immortality 
by pre-
serving their bodies. Mummification never became general practice in Egypt, but 
with
or without preservation of the body, a variety of religious cults promised to 
lead indi-

viduals of all classes to immortality.

Amon and Re

Aten and Monotheism

Mummification


78          P A R T    I    |  The Early Complex Societies, 3500 to 500 B.C.E.

Sources from the Past

The Great Hymn to Aten

After the death of Pharaoh Akhenaten, priests of Amon destroyed temples to Aten 
and all public inscriptions singing
his praises. Yet many private inscriptions survived in tombs of priests and 
royal officials who died while in service at the

new royal capital of Akhetaten. In excavating these tombs, archaeologists have 
brought to light many texts praising Aten
and outlining the monotheistic beliefs surrounding his cult. Most famous of 
these inscriptions is the text known as “The
Great Hymn to Aten.”


Splendid you rise in heaven’s lightland,
O living Aten, creator of life!

When you have dawned in eastern lightland,
You fill every land with your beauty.

You are beauteous, great radiant,
High over every land;

Your rays embrace the lands,

To the limit of all that you made. . . .

When you set in western lightland,
Earth is in darkness as if in death;

One sleeps in chambers, heads covered,
One eye does not see another.

Were they robbed of their goods,
That are under their heads,
People would not remark it.

Every lion comes from its den,
All the serpents bite;

Darkness hovers, earth is silent,
As their maker rests in lightland.

Earth brightens when you dawn in lightland.
When you shine as Aten of daytime;

As you dispel the dark,
As you cast your rays,

The Two Lands [of Upper Egypt and Lower Egypt]
are in festivity.

Awake they stand on their feet,
You have roused them;

Bodies cleansed, clothed,

Their arms adore your appearance.
The entire land sets out to work. . . .

How many are your deeds,
Though hidden from sight,

O Sole God beside whom there is none!

You made the earth as you wished, you alone,
All peoples, herds, and flocks;

All upon earth that walk on legs,
All on high that fly on wings,
The lands of Khor and Kush,
The land of Egypt. . . .

Your rays nurse all fields,

When you shine they live, they grow for you;
You made the seasons to foster all that you made,
Winter to cool them, heat that they taste you.

You made the far sky to shine therein,
To behold all that you made;

You alone, shining in your form of living Aten,
Risen, radiant, distant, near.

You made millions of forms from yourself alone,
Towns, villages, fields, the river’s course;

All eyes observe you upon them,

For you are the Aten of daytime on high.

FOR FURTHER REFLECTION

As conceived in “The Great Hymn to Aten,” what was
the role of Aten as creator and sustainer of life on earth?

SOURCE: Miriam Lichtheim, ed. Ancient Egyptian Literature, 3 vols. Berkeley: 
University of California Press, 1976, 2: 96–99.


Cult of Osiris

The cult of Osiris attracted particularly strong popular interest. According to 
the
myths surrounding the cult, Osiris’s evil brother Seth murdered him and 
scattered his
dismembered parts throughout the land, but the victim’s loyal wife, Isis, 
retrieved his
parts and gave her husband a proper burial. Impressed by her devotion, the gods 
re-
stored Osiris to life—not to physical human life among mortals, however, but to 
a dif-
ferent kind of existence as god of the underworld, the dwelling place of the 
departed.
Because of his death and resurrection, Egyptians associated Osiris with the 
Nile (which


C H A P T E R    3   |  Early African Societies and the Bantu Migrations        
   79

Osiris (seated at right) receives a recently deceased individual, while 
attendants weigh the
heart of another individual against a feather. This illustration comes from a 
papyrus copy
of the Book of the Dead that was buried with a royal mummy.


flooded, retreated, and then flooded again the following year) and with their 
crops
(which grew, died, and then sprouted and grew again.)

Egyptians also associated Osiris with immortality and honored him through a 
reli-
gious cult that demanded observance of high moral standards. As lord of the 
under-
world, Osiris had the power to determine who deserved the blessing of 
immortality and
who did not. Following their deaths, individual souls faced the judgment of 
Osiris, who
had their hearts weighed against a feather symbolizing justice. Those with 
heavy hearts
carrying a burden of evil and guilt did not merit immortality, whereas those of 
pure
heart and honorable deeds gained the gift of eternal life. Thus Osiris’s cult 
held out
hope of eternal reward for those who behaved according to high moral standards, 
and it
cast its message in terms understandable to cultivators in early agricultural 
society.

Nubian peoples observed their own religious traditions, some of which they 
proba-
bly inherited from the early agricultural societies of the Sudan, but little 
written infor-
mation survives to throw light on their religious beliefs. The most prominent 
of the
Nubian deities was the lion-god Apedemak, often depicted with a bow and arrows,
who served as war god for the kingdom of Kush. Another deity, Sebiumeker, was a
creator god and divine guardian of his human devotees.

Alongside native traditions, Egyptian religious cults were quite prominent in 
Nubia,
especially after the aggressive pharaohs of the New Kingdom imposed Egyptian 
rule on
the southern lands. Nubian peoples did not mummify the remains of their 
deceased,
but they built pyramids similar to those of Egypt, although

smaller, and they embraced several Egyptian gods.
Amon was the preeminent Egyptian deity in Nubia
as in Egypt itself: many Nubian temples hon-
ored Amon, and the kings of Kush portrayed
themselves  as  champions  of  the  Egyptian

god. Osiris was also popular in Nubia, where
he sometimes appeared in association with the
native deity Sebiumeker. In the early days after

their  introduction,  Egyptian  cults  were  most
prominent among the Nubian ruling classes. Grad-
ually,  however,  Egyptian  gods  attracted  a  sizable

Nubian Religious
Beliefs

An elaborate gold ring
from a tomb at Meroë,
dating probably to the
third century C.E., de-
picts a deity named
Sebiumeker (some-
times referred to as
Sebewyemeker).

Although often asso-
ciated with Osiris,
Sebiumeker was a
Meroitic god with no
exact counterpart in
Egypt.


80          P A R T    I    |  The Early Complex Societies, 3500 to 500 B.C.E.


The Bantu

Bantu Migrations

following, and they remained popular in Nubia until the sixth century C.E. They 
did not
displace native gods so much as they joined them in the Nubian pantheon. 
Indeed, Nu-
bians often identified Egyptian gods with their own deities or endowed the 
foreign gods
with traits important in Nubian society.

Bantu Migrations and Early Agricultural
Societies of Sub-Saharan Africa

Like their counterparts in southwest Asia, Egyptian and Nubian societies 
partici-
pated in a much larger world of interaction and exchange. Mesopotamian societies
developed under the strong influences of long-distance trade, diffusions of 
techno-
logical innovations, the spread of cultural traditions, and the far-flung 
migrations of
Semitic and Indo-European peoples. Similarly, quite apart from their dealings 
with
southwest Asian and Mediterranean peoples, Egyptian and Nubian societies devel-
oped    in the context of widespread interaction and exchange in sub-Saharan 
Africa.
The most prominent processes unfolding in sub-Saharan Africa during ancient 
times
were the migrations of Bantu-speaking peoples and the establishment of 
agricultural
societies in regions where Bantu speakers settled. Just as Sudanic agriculture 
spread
to   the Nile valley and provided an economic foundation for the development of
Egyptian and Nubian societies, it also spread to most other regions of Africa 
south of
the Sahara and supported the emergence of distinctive agricultural societies.

The Dynamics of Bantu Expansion

Among the most influential peoples of sub-Saharan Africa in ancient times were 
those
who spoke Bantu languages. The original Bantu language was one of many related
tongues in the larger Niger-Congo family of languages widely spoken in west 
Africa
after 4000 B.C.E. (Niger-Congo languages include also those spoken by Mande, 
Kru,
Wolof, Yoruba, Igbo, and other peoples.) The earliest Bantu speakers inhabited 
a re-
gion embracing the eastern part of modern Nigeria and the southern part of 
modern
Cameroon. Members of this community referred to themselves as bantu (meaning
“persons” or “people”). The earliest Bantu speakers settled mostly along the 
banks of
rivers, which they navigated in canoes, and in open areas of the region’s 
forests. They
cultivated yams and oil palms, which first came under cultivation by early 
agricultural
peoples in the western Sudan, and in later centuries they also adopted crops 
that
reached them from the eastern and central Sudan, particularly millet and 
sorghum.
They also kept goats and raised guinea fowl. They lived in clan-based villages 
headed
by chiefs who conducted religious rituals and represented their communities in 
dealings
with neighboring villages. They traded regularly with hunting and gathering 
peoples
who inhabited the tropical forests. Formerly called pygmies, these peoples are 
now re-
ferred to as forest peoples. Bantu cultivators provided these forest peoples 
with pot-
tery and stone axes in exchange for meat, honey, and other forest products.

Unlike most of their neighbors, the Bantu displayed an early readiness to 
migrate
to new territories. By 3000 B.C.E. they were slowly spreading south into the 
west
African forest, and after 2000 B.C.E. they expanded rapidly to the south toward 
the
Congo River basin and east toward the Great Lakes, absorbing local populations 
of
hunting, gathering, and fishing peoples into their agricultural societies. Over 
the cen-
turies, as some groups of Bantu speakers settled and others moved on to new 
territo-
ries, their languages differentiated into more than five hundred distinct but 
related
tongues. (Today, more than ninety million people speak Bantu languages, which 
col-


C H A P T E R    3   |  Early African Societies and the Bantu Migrations        
   81


an

D E

Lake Chad

   Map 3.3      Bantu migra-
tions, 2000 B.C.E.–1000 C.E.

Note that Bantu migrations
proceeded to the south and east
of      the original homeland of
Bantu-speaking peoples. To
what extent do technological
considerations help to explain
the extent of the Bantu migra-
tions? Why did Bantu-speaking
peoples not migrate also to the
north and west of their
homeland?


Equator

Gulf of
Guinea

Lake Victoria

ATLANTIC
OCEAN


Bantu homeland
Bantu migrations

Sites of early
iron production

KALAHARI
DESERT

INDIAN


0                              500

0                                     1000

1000

2000

1500 mi

3000 km

Cape of Good Hope

OCEAN

lectively constitute the most prominent family of languages in sub-Saharan 
Africa.)
Like the Indo-European migrations discussed in chapter 2, the Bantu migrations 
were
not mass movements of peoples. Instead, they were intermittent and incremental
processes that resulted in the gradual spread of Bantu languages and ethnic 
communi-
ties,    as small groups moved to new territories and established settlements, 
which then
became foundations for further expansion. By 1000 C.E. Bantu-speaking peoples 
occu-
pied most of Africa south of the equator.

The precise motives of the early Bantu migrants remain shrouded in the mists of
time, but it seems likely that population pressures drove the migrations. Two 
features of
Bantu society were especially important for the earliest migrations. First, 
Bantu peoples
made effective use of canoes in traveling the networks of the Niger, Congo, and 
other
rivers. Canoes enabled Bantu to travel rapidly up and down the rivers, 
leapfrogging
established communities and establishing new settlements at inviting spots on 
river-
banks. Second, agricultural surpluses enabled the Bantu population to increase 
more
rapidly than the populations of hunting, gathering, and fishing peoples whom 
they en-
countered as they moved into new regions. When settlements grew uncomfortably


82          P A R T    I    |  The Early Complex Societies, 3500 to 500 B.C.E.


Iron and Migration

Spread of Agriculture

Religious Beliefs

large and placed strains on available resources, small groups left their parent 
communi-
ties and moved to new territories. Sometimes they moved to new sites along the 
rivers,
but they often moved inland as well, encroaching on territories occupied by 
forest peo-
ples. Bantu migrants placed pressures on the forest dwellers, and they most 
likely
clashed with them over land resources. They learned a great deal about local 
environ-
ments from the forest peoples, however, and they also continued to trade 
regularly
with them. Indeed, they often intermarried and absorbed forest peoples into 
Bantu
agricultural society.

After about 1000 B.C.E., the pace of Bantu migrations quickened, as Bantu 
peoples
began to produce iron tools and weapons. Iron tools enabled Bantu cultivators 
to clear
land and expand the zone of agriculture more effectively than before, and iron 
weap-
ons strengthened the hand of Bantu groups against adversaries and competitors 
for
lands or other resources. Thus iron metallurgy supported rapid population growth
among the Bantu while also lending increased momentum to their continuing migra-
tions, which in turn facilitated the spread of iron metallurgy throughout most 
of sub-
Saharan Africa.

Early Agricultural Societies of Sub-Saharan Africa

Several smaller migrations took place alongside the spread of Bantu peoples in 
sub-
Saharan Africa. Between 3500 and 1000 B.C.E., southern Kushite herders pushed
into parts of east Africa (modern-day Kenya and Tanzania), while Sudanese 
cultiva-
tors and herders moved into the upper reaches of the Nile River (now southern
Sudan and northern Uganda). Meanwhile, Mande-speaking peoples who cultivated
African rice established communities along the Atlantic estuaries of west 
Africa, and
other peoples speaking Niger-Congo languages spread the cultivation of okra from
forest regions throughout much of west Africa.

Among the most important effects of Bantu and other migrations was the estab-
lishment of agricultural societies throughout most of sub-Saharan Africa. 
Between
1000 and 500 B.C.E., cultivators extended the cultivation of yams and grains 
deep
into east and south Africa (modern-day Kenya, Malawi, Mozambique, Zimbabwe,
and South Africa), while herders introduced sheep and cattle to the region. 
About
the same time, Bantu and other peoples speaking Niger-Congo languages spread the
intensive cultivation of yams, oil palms, millet, and sorghum throughout west 
and
central Africa while also introducing sheep, pigs, and cattle to the region. By 
the late
centuries B.C.E., agriculture had reached almost all of sub-Saharan Africa 
except for
densely forested regions and deserts.

As cultivation and herding spread throughout sub-Saharan Africa, agricultural 
peo-
ples built distinctive societies and cultural traditions. Most Bantu and other 
peoples as
well lived in communities of a few hundred individuals led by chiefs. Many 
peoples rec-
ognized groups known as age sets, or age grades, consisting of individuals born 
within
a     few years of one another. Members of each age set jointly assumed 
responsibility for
tasks appropriate to their levels of strength, energy, maturity, and 
experience. During
their early years, for example, members of an age set might perform light 
public chores.
At maturity, members jointly underwent elaborate initiation rites that 
introduced them
to adult society. Older men cultivated fields and provided military service, 
while women
tended to domestic chores and sometimes traded at markets. In later years, 
members
of age sets served as community leaders and military officers.

African cultivators and herders also developed distinctive cultural and 
religious tra-
ditions. Both Sudanic and Niger-Congo peoples (including Bantu speakers), for 
exam-
ple, held monotheistic religious beliefs by 5000 B.C.E. Sudanic peoples 
recognized a


C H A P T E R    3   |  Early African Societies and the Bantu Migrations        
   83

single, impersonal divine force that they regarded as the source of both good 
and evil.
They believed that this divine force could take the form of individual spirits, 
and they
often addressed the divine force through prayers to intermediary spirits. The 
divine
force itself, however, was ultimately responsible for rewards and punishments 
meted
out to human beings. For their part, Niger-Congo peoples recognized a single god
originally called Nyamba who created the world and established the principles 
that
would govern its development and then stepped back and allowed the world to pro-
ceed on its own. Individuals did not generally address this distant creator god 
directly
but, rather, offered their prayers to ancestor spirits and local territorial 
spirits believed
to inhabit the world and influence the fortunes of living humans. Proper 
attention to
these spirits would ensure good fortune, they believed, whereas their neglect 
would
bring punishment or adversity from disgruntled spirits.

Individual communities did not always hold religious beliefs in the precise 
forms
just outlined. Rather, they frequently borrowed elements from other communities 
and
adapted their beliefs to changing circumstances or fresh understandings of the 
world.
Migrations of Bantu and other peoples in particular resulted in a great deal of 
cultural
mixing and mingling, and religious beliefs often spread to new communities in 
the
wake of population movements. After 1000 B.C.E., for example, as they 
encountered
Sudanic peoples and their reverence of a single divine force that was the 
source of good
and evil, many Bantu peoples associated the god Nyamba with goodness. As a 
result,
this formerly distant creator god took on a new moral dimension that brought him
closer to the lives of individuals. Thus, changing religious beliefs sometimes 
reflected
widespread interactions among African societies.

ike other world regions, Africa was a land in which peoples of different 
societies regu-
larly traded, communicated, and interacted with one another from ancient times.
African agriculture and herding first emerged in the Sudan, then spread both to 
the Nile
River valley and to arable lands throughout sub-Saharan Africa. Agricultural 
crops and
domesticated animals from southwest Asia soon made their way into the Nile 
valley. With
its        broad floodplains, Egypt became an especially productive land, while 
Nubia supported
a smaller but flourishing society. Throughout the Nile valley, abundant 
agricultural sur-
pluses supported dense populations and supported the construction of prosperous 
soci-
eties with sophisticated cultural traditions. Elsewhere in sub-Saharan Africa, 
populations
were less dense, but the migrations of Bantu and other peoples facilitated the 
spread of
agriculture, and later iron metallurgy as well, throughout most of the region. 
Meanwhile,
the   Nile River served as a route of trade and communication linking Egypt and 
the
Mediterranean basin to the north with the Sudan and sub-Saharan Africa to the 
south.

Only in the context of migration, trade, communication, and interaction is it 
possible to
understand the early development of African societies.


84          P A R T    I    |  The Early Complex Societies, 3500 to 500 B.C.E.

C  H  R  O  N  O  L  O  G  Y

9000 B.C.E.                                                Origins of Sudanic 
herding

7500 B.C.E.                                                Origins of Sudanic 
cultivation

3100 B.C.E.                                                Unification of Egypt

3100–2660 B.C.E.                                     Archaic Period of Egyptian 
history

2660–2160 B.C.E.                                     Egyptian Old Kingdom

2600–2500 B.C.E.                                     Era of pyramid building in 
Egypt

2500–1450 B.C.E.                                     Early kingdom of Kush with 
capital at Kerma

2040–1640 B.C.E.                                     Egyptian Middle Kingdom

2000 B.C.E.                                                Beginnings of Bantu 
migrations

1550–1070 B.C.E.                                     Egyptian New Kingdom

1479–1425 B.C.E.                                     Reign of Pharaoh Tuthmosis 
III

1473–1458 B.C.E.                                     Reign of Queen Hatshepsut 
(coruler with Tuthmosis III)

1353–1335 B.C.E.                                     Reign of Pharaoh Amenhotep 
IV (Akhenaten)

900 B.C.E.                                                   Invention of iron 
metallurgy in sub-Saharan Africa

760 B.C.E.                                                   Conquest of Egypt 
by King Kashta of Kush

F   O   R      F   U   R  T   H   E   R      R   E   A   D   I   N   G


Cyril Aldred. The Egyptians. Rev. ed. New York, 1984. A popular,
well-illustrated, and reliable survey of ancient Egyptian history.
Elizabeth Wayland Barber. Women’s Work: The First 20,000 Years.

New York, 1994. Fascinating study of ancient textiles, which
the author argues was a craft industry dominated by women
from the earliest times.

Stanley Burstein, ed. Ancient African Civilizations: Kush and
Axum. Princeton, 1998. Brings together the principal Greek
and Latin writings on the kingdoms of Kush and Axum.

Basil Davidson. Lost Cities of Africa. Rev. ed. Boston, 1970. Pop-
ular account with discussions of Kush and Meroë.

Christopher Ehret. An African Classical Age: Eastern and Southern
Africa in World History, 1000 B.C. to A.D. 400.  Charlottes-
ville, Va., 1998. A pathbreaking volume focusing on eastern
and southern Africa and drawing on both linguistic and archae-
ological evidence.

———.  The  Civilizations  of  Africa:  A  History  to  1800.  Char-
lottesville, Va., 2001. An important contribution that views
Africa   in the context of world history.

John  L.  Foster.  Ancient  Egyptian  Literature:  An  Anthology.
Austin, 2001. A useful and readily accessible selection of lit-
erary works from ancient Egypt.

Zahi  Hawass.  Silent Images: Women in Pharaonic Egypt.  New
York, 2000. A prominent archaeologist draws on both tex-
tual and artifactual evidence in throwing light on women’s
experiences in ancient Egypt.

T. G. H. James. Pharaoh’s People: Scenes from Life in Imperial
Egypt. London, 1984. Draws on archaeological and literary
scholarship in reconstructing daily life in ancient Egypt.

Timothy Kendall, ed. Kerma and the Kingdom of Kush, 2500–1500
B.C.:  The  Archaeological  Discovery  of  an  Ancient  Nubian
Empire. Washington, D.C., 1997. Well-illustrated volume that
focuses on the city of Kerma and its role in ancient Nubian
society.

Miriam Lichtheim, ed. Ancient Egyptian Literature. 3 vols. Berke-
ley, 1973–80. An important collection of primary sources in
translation that reflects the results of recent scholarship.

Roderick James McIntosh. The Peoples of the Middle Niger: The
Island of Gold. Oxford, 1998. Fascinating volume emphasiz-
ing the environmental context of west African history.

James B. Pritchard, ed. Ancient Near Eastern Texts Relating to the
Old Testament. 2 vols. 3rd ed. Princeton, 1975. Important
collection of primary sources in translation that emphasizes
parallels between the ancient Hebrews and other peoples.


C H A P T E R    3   |  Early African Societies and the Bantu Migrations        
   85


Catharine H. Roehrig, Renée Dreyfus, and Cathleen A. Keller,
eds. Hatshepsut: From Queen to Pharaoh. New York, 2005.
Brilliantly illustrated volume focusing on the reign of the
New Kingdom’s female pharaoh.

Jan Vansina. Paths in the Rainforests: Toward a History of Politi-
cal Tradition in Equatorial Africa. Madison, 1990. A bril-

liant synthesis concentrating on central Africa by one of the
world’s foremost historians of Africa.

Derek  A.  Welsby.  The  Kingdom  of  Kush:  The  Napatan  and
Meroitic Empires. London, 1996. Draws on both written and
archaeological sources in tracing the development of ancient
Nubia and charting its relationship with Egypt.

