Ancient India

Harappan Society

Religion in the Vedic Age

Foundations of Harappan Society
Harappan Society and Culture

Aryan Religion
The Blending of Aryan and Dravidian Values

The Indo-European Migrations
and Early Aryan India
The Aryans and India
Origins of the Caste System
The Development of Patriarchal Society

For a god, Indra was a very rambunctious fellow. According to the stories told about him by
the Aryans, Indra had few if any peers in fighting, feasting, or drinking. The Aryans were a
herding people who spoke an Indo-European language and who migrated to south Asia in
large numbers after 1500 B.C.E. In the early days of their migrations they took Indra as their
chief deity. The Aryans told dozens of stories about Indra and sang hundreds of hymns in
his honor.
One story had to do with a war between the gods and the demons. When the gods were
flagging, they appointed Indra as their leader, and soon they had turned the tide against
their enemies. Another story, a favorite of the Aryans, had to do with Indra’s role in bringing
rain to the earth—a crucial concern for any agricultural society. According to this story, Indra
did battle with a dragon who lived in the sky and hoarded water in the clouds. Indra first
slaked his thirst with generous drafts of soma, a hallucinogenic potion consumed by Aryan
priests, and then attacked the dragon, which he killed by hurling thunderbolts at it. The
dragon’s heavy fall caused turmoil both on earth and in the atmosphere, but afterward the
rains filled seven rivers that flowed through northern India and brought life-giving waters to
inhabitants of the region.
The Aryans took Indra as a leader against earthly as well as heavenly foes. They did not
mount a planned invasion of India, but as they migrated in sizable numbers into south Asia,
they came into conflict with Dravidian peoples already living there. When they clashed with
the Dravidians, the Aryans took the belligerent Indra as their guide. Aryan hymns praised
Indra as the military hero who trampled enemy forces and opened the way for the migrants
to build a new society.
For all his contributions, Indra did not survive permanently as a prominent deity. As Aryan
and Dravidian peoples mixed, mingled, interacted, and intermarried, tensions between them
subsided. Memories of the stormy and violent Indra receded into the background, and eventually they faded almost to nothing. For a thousand years and more, however, Aryans looked
upon the rowdy, raucous war god as a ready source of inspiration as they sought to build a
society in an already occupied land.
Tools excavated by archaeologists show that India was a site of paleolithic communities at
least two hundred thousand years ago, long before the Aryans introduced Indra to south Asia.
Between 8000 and 5000 B.C.E., cultivators built a neolithic society west of the Indus River, in
the region bordering on the Iranian plateau, probably as a result of Mesopotamian influence.
By 7000 B.C.E. agriculture had taken root in the Indus River valley. Thereafter agriculture spread

OPPOSITE:

Sandstone bust of a distinguished man, perhaps a priest-king, from Mohenjo-daro.

87

ben06937.Ch04_086-107.qxd

88

PART I |

8/30/07

9:08 AM

Page 88

The Early Complex Societies, 3500 to 500 B.C.E.
rapidly, and by about 3000 B.C.E. Dravidian peoples had established neolithic communities
throughout much of the Indian subcontinent. The earliest neolithic settlers cultivated wheat,
barley, and cotton, and they also kept herds of cattle, sheep, and goats. Agricultural villages
were especially numerous in the valley of the Indus River. As the population of the valley
swelled and as people interacted with increasing frequency, some of those villages evolved
into bustling cities, which served as the organizational centers of Indian society.
Early cities in India stood at the center of an impressive political, social, and cultural order
built by Dravidian peoples on the foundation of an agricultural economy. The earliest urban
society in India, known as Harappan society, brought wealth and power to the Indus River
valley. Eventually, however, it fell into decline, possibly because of environmental problems,
just as large numbers of Indo-European migrants moved into India from central Asia and
built a very different society. For half a millennium, from about 1500 to 1000 B.C.E., the Indian
subcontinent was a site of turmoil as the migrants struggled with Dravidian peoples for control of the land and its resources. Gradually, however, stability returned with the establishment of numerous agricultural villages and regional states. During the centuries after 1000 B.C.E.,
Aryan and Dravidian peoples increasingly interacted and intermarried, and their combined
legacies led to the development of a distinctive society and a rich cultural tradition.

Harappan Society
Like societies in Mesopotamia and Egypt, Harappan society—named after Harappa,
one of its two chief cities—developed in the valley of a river, the Indus, whose waters
were available for irrigation of crops. As agricultural yields increased, the population
also grew rapidly, and by about 3000 B.C.E. neolithic villages were evolving into thriving cities.
Unfortunately, it is impossible to follow the development of Harappan society in
detail for two reasons. One is that many of the earliest Harappan physical remains are
inaccessible. Silt deposits have raised the level of the land in the Indus valley, and the
water table has risen correspondingly. Because the earliest Harappan remains lie below
the water table, archaeologists cannot excavate them or study them systematically. The
earliest accessible remains date from about 2500 B.C.E., when Harappan society was already well established. As a result, scholars have learned something about Harappa at
its high point, but little about the circumstances that brought it into being or the conditions of life during its earliest days.
A second problem that handicaps scholars who study Harappan society is the lack
of deciphered written records. Harappans had a system of writing that used about four
hundred symbols to represent sounds and words, and archaeologists have discovered
thousands of clay seals, copper tablets, and other artifacts with Harappan inscriptions.
Scholars consider the language most likely a Dravidian tongue related to those currently spoken in central and southern India, but they have not yet succeeded in deciphering the script. As a result, the details of Harappan life remain hidden behind the
veil of an elaborate pictographic script. The understanding of Harappan society depends entirely on the study of material remains that archaeologists have uncovered
since the 1920s.

Foundations of Harappan Society
The Indus River

If the Greek historian Herodotus had known of Harappan society, he might have
called it the “gift of the Indus.” Like the Nile, the Indus draws its waters from rain

ben06937.Ch04_086-107.qxd

8/30/07

9:08 AM

Page 89

CHAPTER 4 |

Early Societies in South Asia

and melting snow in towering mountains—in this case, the Hindu Kush and the Himalayas, the world’s highest peaks. As the waters charge downhill, they pick up enormous quantities of silt, which they carry for hundreds of kilometers. Like the Nile
again, the Indus then deposits its burden of rich soil as it courses through lowlands
and loses its force. Today, a series of dams has largely tamed the Indus, but for most
of history it spilled its waters annually over a vast floodplain, sometimes with devastating effect. Much less predictable than the Nile, the Indus has many times left its
channel altogether and carved a new course to the sea.
Despite its occasional ferocity, the Indus made agricultural society possible in
northern India. Early cultivators sowed wheat and barley in September, after the
flood receded, and harvested their crops the following spring. Inhabitants of the valley supplemented their harvests of wheat and barley with meat from herds of cattle,
sheep, and goats. Their diet also included poultry: cultivators in the Indus valley kept
flocks of the world’s first domesticated chickens. Indus valley inhabitants cultivated
cotton probably before 5000 B.C.E., and fragments of dyed cloth dating to about
2000 B.C.E. testify to the existence of a cotton textile industry.
As in Mesopotamia and Egypt, agricultural surpluses in India vastly increased the
food supply, stimulated population growth, and supported the establishment of cities
and specialized labor. Between 3000 and 2500 B.C.E., Dravidian peoples built a complex society that dominated the Indus River valley until its decline after 1900 B.C.E.
The agricultural surplus of the Indus valley fed two large cities, Harappa and Mohenjodaro, as well as subordinate cities and a vast agricultural hinterland. Archaeologists
have excavated about seventy Harappan settlements along the Indus River. Harappan
society embraced much of modern-day Pakistan and a large part of northern India as
well—a territory about 1.3 million square kilometers (502,000 square miles)—and
thus was considerably larger than either Mesopotamian or Egyptian society.
No evidence survives concerning the Harappan political system. Archaeological excavations have turned up no evidence of a royal or imperial authority. It is possible
that, like the early Sumerian city-states, the Harappan cities were economic and political centers for their own regions. Because of their large size, however, Harappa and
Mohenjo-daro were especially prominent in Harappan society even if they did not
dominate the Indus valley politically or militarily. The population of Mohenjo-daro
was thirty-five to forty thousand, and Harappa was probably slightly smaller. Archaeologists have discovered the sites of about 1,500 Harappan settlements, but none of the
others approached the size of Harappa or Mohenjo-daro.
Both Harappa and Mohenjo-daro had city walls, a fortified citadel, and a large
granary, suggesting that they served as centers of political authority and sites for the
collection and redistribution of taxes paid in the form of grain. The two cities represented a considerable investment of human labor and other resources: both featured
marketplaces, temples, public buildings, extensive residential districts, and broad
streets laid out on a carefully planned grid so that they ran north-south or east-west.
Mohenjo-daro also had a large pool, perhaps used for religious or ritual purposes,
with private dressing rooms for bathers.
The two cities clearly established the patterns that shaped the larger society:
weights, measures, architectural styles, and even brick sizes were consistent throughout the land, even though the Harappan society stretched almost 1,500 kilometers
(932 miles) from one end to the other. This standardization no doubt reflects the
prominence of Harappa and Mohenjo-daro as powerful and wealthy cities whose influence touched all parts of Harappan society. The high degree of standardization
was possible also because the Indus River facilitated trade, travel, and communications among the far-flung regions of Harappan society.

89

Political Organization

Harappa and
Mohenjo-Daro

ben06937.Ch04_086-107.qxd

90

PART I |

8/30/07

9:08 AM

Page 90

The Early Complex Societies, 3500 to 500 B.C.E.

Ca

sp

Black Sea

ian
Sea

A N AT O L I A

TARIM BASIN

T

ig

HINDU
KUSH

ris
Khyber Pass

anean Sea

IRANIAN
PLATEAU

Eu

diterr

ph

ra

tes

r
Pe

d
In
Mohenjo-daro

si

an

le

Ni

Gu

TIBETAN
PLATEAU

Harappa

us

Me

HI
G

an

ge

MA

L AY

AS

s

lf

Red

ARABIAN

DECCAN

Se

PENINSULA

a

PLATEAU
Arabian Sea

S U DAN

Bay of
Bengal

Harappan society
Egypt

INDIAN OCEAN

Mesopotamia
Trade routes

0
0

500
1000

1000

1500 mi
2000

3000 km

Map 4.1 Harappan society and its neighbors, ca. 2000 B.C.E. Compare Harappan society with its Mesopotamian and Egyptian contemporaries
with respect to size. What conditions would have been necessary to enable trade to flow between the Indus River valley and Mesopotamia?

Specialized Labor
and Trade

Like all complex societies in ancient times, Harappa depended on a successful agricultural economy. But Harappans also engaged in trade, both domestic and foreign.
Pottery, tools, and decorative items produced in Harappa and Mohenjo-daro found
their way to all corners of the Indus valley. From neighboring peoples in Persia and
the Hindu Kush mountains, the Harappans obtained gold, silver, copper, lead, gems,
and semiprecious stones. During the period about 2300 to 1750 B.C.E., they also
traded with Mesopotamians, exchanging Indian copper, ivory, beads, and semiprecious stones for Sumerian wool, leather, and olive oil. Some of that trade may have
gone by land over the Iranian plateau, but most of it probably traveled by ships that
followed the coastline of the Arabian Sea between the mouth of the Indus River and
the Persian Gulf.

Harappan Society and Culture
Like societies in Mesopotamia and Egypt, Harappan society generated considerable
wealth. Excavations at Mohenjo-daro show that at its high point, from about 2500
to 2000 B.C.E., the city was a thriving economic center with a population of about
forty thousand. Goldsmiths, potters, weavers, masons, and architects, among other

ben06937.Ch04_086-107.qxd

8/30/07

9:08 AM

Page 91

CHAPTER 4 |

Early Societies in South Asia

This aerial view of the excavations at Mohenjo-daro illustrates the careful planning and precise layout of the city.

professionals, maintained shops that lined Mohenjo-daro’s streets. Other cities also
housed communities of jewelers, artists, and merchants.
The wealth of Harappan society, like that in Mesopotamia and Egypt, encouraged
the formation of social distinctions. Harappans built no pyramids, palaces, or magnificent tombs, but their rulers wielded great authority from the citadels at Harappa and
Mohenjo-daro. It is clear from Harappan dwellings that rich and poor lived in very different styles. In Mohenjo-daro, for example, many people lived in one-room tenements in barrackslike structures, but there were also individual houses of two and three
stories with a dozen rooms and an interior courtyard, as well as a few large houses with
several dozen rooms and multiple courtyards. Most of the larger houses had their own
wells and built-in brick ovens. Almost all houses had private bathrooms with showers
and toilets that drained into city sewage systems. The water and sewage systems of
Mohenjo-daro were among the most sophisticated of the ancient world, and they represented a tremendous investment of community resources.
In the absence of deciphered writing, Harappan beliefs and values are even more
difficult to interpret than politics and society. Archaeologists have discovered samples
of Harappan writing dating as early as 3300 B.C.E., and they have recovered hundreds
of seals bearing illustrations and written inscriptions. Scholars have been able to identify several symbols representing names or words, but not enough to understand the
significance of the texts. Even without written texts, however, material remains shed

Social Distinctions

91

ben06937.Ch04_086-107.qxd

92

PART I |

Fertility Cults

Harappan Decline

8/30/07

9:08 AM

Page 92

The Early Complex Societies, 3500 to 500 B.C.E.

some tantalizing light on Harappan society. A variety of statues, figurines, and illustrations carved onto seals reflect a tradition
of representational art as well as expertise
in gold, copper, and bronze metallurgy. A
particularly striking statue is a bronze
figurine of a dancing girl discovered at
Mohenjo-daro. Provocatively posed and
clad only in bracelets and a necklace, the
figure expresses a remarkable suppleness
and liveliness.
Harappan religion reflected a strong
concern for fertility. Like other early agricultural societies, Harappans venerated
gods and goddesses whom they associated
with creation and procreation. They recognized a mother goddess and a horned
fertility god, and they held trees and animals sacred because of their associations
with vital forces. For lack of written descriptions, it is impossible to characterize
Harappan religious beliefs more specifically. Many scholars believe, however, that
some Harappan deities survived the collapse of the larger society and found places
Bronze statuette of a dancing girl
later in the Hindu pantheon. Fertility and
from Mohenjo-daro.
procreation are prominent concerns in
popular Hinduism, and scholars have often noticed similarities between Harappan
and Hindu deities associated with those values.
Sometime after 1900 B.C.E., Harappan society entered a period of decline. One
cause was ecological degradation: Harappans deforested the Indus valley to clear land
for cultivation and to obtain firewood. Deforestation led to erosion of topsoil and also
to reduced amounts of rainfall. Over hundreds of years—perhaps half a millennium or
more—most of the Indus valley became a desert, and agriculture is possible there today
only with the aid of artificial irrigation. Those climatic and ecological changes reduced
agricultural yields, and Harappan society faced a subsistence crisis during the centuries
after 1900 B.C.E.
It is also likely that natural catastrophes—periodic flooding of the Indus River or
earthquakes—weakened Harappan society. Archaeologists found more than thirty unburied human skeletons scattered about the streets and buildings of Mohenjo-daro.
No sign of criminal or military violence accounts for their presence, but a sudden flood
or earthquake could have trapped some residents who were unable to flee the impending disaster. In any case, by about 1700 B.C.E., the populations of Harappa and
Mohenjo-daro had abandoned the cities as mounting difficulties made it impossible to
sustain complex urban societies. Some of the smaller, subordinate cities outlived
Harappa and Mohenjo-daro, but by about 1500 B.C.E., Harappan cities had almost entirely collapsed.
Decline of the cities, however, did not mean the total disappearance of Harappan
social and cultural traditions. In many ways, Harappan traditions survived the decline
of the cities, because peoples from other societies adopted Harappan ways for their

ben06937.Ch04_086-107.qxd

8/30/07

9:08 AM

Page 93

CHAPTER 4 |

Early Societies in South Asia

The carving on a seal discovered at Mohenjo-daro depicts a man wearing
cattle horns and meditating while surrounded by both domestic and wild
animals. The figure may well represent a Harappan deity.

own purposes. Cultivation of wheat, barley, and cotton continued to flourish in the
Indus valley long after the decline of Harappan society. Harappan deities and religious beliefs intrigued migrants to India and found a home in new societies. Eventually, cities themselves returned to south Asia, and, in some cases, Harappan urban
traditions may even have inspired the establishment of new cities.

The Indo-European Migrations
and Early Aryan India
During the second millennium B.C.E., as Harappan society declined, bands of foreigners filtered into the Indian subcontinent and settled throughout the Indus valley
and beyond. Most prominent were nomadic and pastoral peoples speaking IndoEuropean languages who called themselves Aryans (“noble people”). By 1500 B.C.E.
or perhaps somewhat earlier, they had begun to file through the passes of the Hindu
Kush mountains and establish small herding and agricultural communities throughout northern India.
Their migrations took place over several centuries: by no means did the arrival of
the Aryans constitute an invasion or an organized military campaign. It is likely that
Indo-European migrants clashed with Dravidians and other peoples already settled in

93

ben06937.Ch04_086-107.qxd

94

PART I |

8/30/07

9:08 AM

Page 94

The Early Complex Societies, 3500 to 500 B.C.E.

India, but there is no indication that the Aryans conquered or destroyed Harappan
society. By the time the Indo-Europeans entered India, internal problems had already
brought Harappan society to the point of collapse. During the centuries after 1500
B.C.E., Dravidian and Indo-European peoples intermarried, interacted, and laid social
and cultural foundations that would influence Indian society to the present day.

The Aryans and India
The Early Aryans

The Vedas

The Vedic Age

When they entered India, the Aryans practiced a limited amount of agriculture, but
they depended much more heavily on a pastoral economy. They kept sheep and goats,
but they especially prized their horses and herds of cattle. Horses were quite valuable
because of their expense and relative rarity: horses do not breed well in India, so it
was necessary for Aryans to replenish their supplies of horseflesh by importing animals from central Asia. Like their Indo-European cousins to the north, the Aryans
harnessed horses to carts or wagons to facilitate transportation, and they also hitched
them to chariots, which proved to be devastating war machines when deployed
against peoples who made no use of horsepower. Meanwhile, cattle became the principal measure of wealth in early Aryan society. The Aryans consumed both dairy
products and beef—cattle did not become sacred, protected animals (as they are
today among Hindus) until many centuries after the Aryans’ arrival—and they often
calculated prices in terms of cattle. Wealthy individuals in early Aryan society usually
owned extensive herds of cattle.
The early Aryans did not use writing, but they composed numerous poems and songs.
Indeed, they preserved extensive collections of religious and literary works by memorizing them and transmitting them orally from one generation to another in their sacred
language, Sanskrit. (For everyday communication, the Aryans relied on a related but less
formal tongue known as Prakrit, which later evolved into Hindi, Bengali, Urdu, and
other languages currently spoken in northern India.) The earliest of those orally transmitted works were the Vedas, which were collections of hymns, songs, prayers, and
rituals honoring the various gods of the Aryans. There are four Vedas, the earliest and
most important of which is the Rig Veda, a collection of some 1,028 hymns addressed to
Aryan gods. Aryan priests compiled the Rig Veda between about 1400 and 900 B.C.E.,
and they committed it to writing, along with the three later Vedas, about 600 B.C.E.
The Vedas represent a priestly perspective on affairs: the word veda means “wisdom” or “knowledge” and refers to the knowledge that priests needed to carry out
their functions. While transmitting religious knowledge, however, the Vedas also shed
considerable light on early Aryan society in India. In view of their importance as historical sources, scholars refer to Indian history during the millennium between 1500
and 500 B.C.E. as the Vedic age.
The Vedas reflect a boisterous society in which the Aryans clashed repeatedly with
the Dravidians and other peoples already living in India. The Vedas refer frequently to
conflicts between Aryans and indigenous peoples whom the Aryans called dasas, meaning “enemies” or “subject peoples.” The Vedas identify Indra, the Aryan war god and
military hero, as one who ravaged citadels, smashed dams, and destroyed forts the way
age consumes cloth garments. These characterizations suggest that the Aryans clashed
frequently with the Dravidians of the Indus valley, attacking their cities and wrecking
the irrigation systems that had supported agriculture in Harappan society. It is clear
that Aryans often had friendly relations with Dravidian peoples: they learned about the
land, for example, and adopted Dravidian agricultural techniques when they settled in
villages. Nevertheless, competition over land and resources fueled intermittent conflict
between Aryan and Dravidian peoples.

ben06937.Ch04_086-107.qxd

8/30/07

9:08 AM

Page 95

CHAPTER 4 |

Early Societies in South Asia

The Aryans also fought ferociously among
themselves. They did not have a state or common government but, rather, formed hundreds
of chiefdoms organized around herding communities and agricultural villages. Most of the
chiefdoms had a leader known as a raja—a
Sanskrit term related to the Latin word rex
(“king”)—who governed in collaboration with
a council of village elders. Given the large number of chiefdoms, there was enormous potential for conflict in Aryan society. The men of
one village often raided the herds of their
neighbors—an offense of great significance,
since the Aryans regarded cattle as the chief
form of wealth in their society. Occasionally,
too, ambitious chiefs sought to extend their authority by conquering neighbors and dominating the regions surrounding their communities.
During the early centuries of the Vedic age,
Aryan groups settled in the Punjab, the upper
Indus River valley that straddles the modernday border between northern India and Pakistan. These migrations were some of the most
prominent waves in the larger process of early
Indo-European migrations (discussed in chapter 2). After establishing themselves in the Punjab, Aryan migrants spread east and south and
established communities throughout much of
the Indian subcontinent. After 1000 B.C.E. they
began to settle in the area between the Himalayan foothills and the Ganges River. About that
same time they learned how to make iron tools,
and with axes and iron-tipped plows they
cleared forests and established agricultural communities in the Ganges valley. Iron implements
enabled them to cultivate more land, produce
more food, and support larger communities,
This bronze sword manufactured
which in turn encouraged them to push deeper
by Aryan craftsmen was a much
into the Ganges River valley. There they began
stronger and more effective weapon
to cultivate rice rather than the wheat and barthan those available to Harappan
ley that were staple crops in the Punjab. Since
defenders.
rice is a highly productive crop, it provided food
for rapidly expanding populations. By about 750 B.C.E., populations had increased
enough that Aryans had established the first small cities in the Ganges River valley. Indeed, population became so dense in northern India that some Aryans decided to
move along and seek their fortunes elsewhere. By 500 B.C.E. Aryan groups had migrated as far south as the northern Deccan, a plateau region in the southern cone of
the Indian subcontinent about 1,500 kilometers (950 miles) south of the Punjab.
As they settled into permanent communities and began to rely more on agriculture than herding, the Aryans gradually lost the tribal political organization that they
had brought into India and evolved more formal political institutions. In a few places,

Aryan Migrations
in India

Changing Political
Organization

95

ben06937.Ch04_086-107.qxd

96

PART I |

8/30/07

9:08 AM

Page 96

The Early Complex Societies, 3500 to 500 B.C.E.

especially in the isolated hilly and mountainous regions of northern India, councils
of elders won recognition as the principal sources of political authority. They directed
the affairs of small republics—states governed by representatives of the citizens. In
most places, though, chiefdoms developed into regional kingdoms. Between 1000
and 500 B.C.E., tribal chiefs worked increasingly from permanent capitals and depended on the services of professional administrators. They did not build large imperial states: not until the fourth century B.C.E. did an Indian state embrace as much
territory as Harappan society. But they established regional kingdoms as the most
common form of political organization throughout most of the subcontinent.

Origins of the Caste System

Caste and Varna

Social Distinctions
in the Late
Vedic Age

Although they did not build a large-scale political structure, the Aryans constructed
a well-defined social order. Indeed, in some ways their social hierarchy served to
maintain the order and stability that states and political structures guaranteed in
other societies, such as Mesopotamia, Egypt, and China. The Aryan social structure
rested on sharp hereditary distinctions between individuals and groups, according to
their occupations and roles in society. Those distinctions became the foundation of
the caste system, which largely determined the places that individuals and groups occupied in society.
The term caste comes from the Portuguese word casta, and it refers to a social class
of hereditary and usually unchangeable status. When Portuguese merchants and
mariners visited India during the sixteenth century C.E., they noticed the sharp, inherited distinctions between different social groups, which they referred to as castes. Scholars have employed the term caste ever since in reference to the Indian social order.
The caste system did not come into being overnight. Rather, caste identities developed slowly and gradually as the Aryans established settlements throughout India.
When the Aryans first entered India, they probably had a fairly simple society consisting of herders and cultivators led by warrior-chiefs and priests. As they settled in India,
however, growing social complexity and interaction with Dravidian peoples prompted
them to refine their social distinctions. The Aryans used the term varna, a Sanskrit
word meaning “color,” to refer to the major social classes. This terminology suggests
that social distinctions arose partly from differences in complexion between the Aryans,
who referred to themselves as “wheat-colored,” and the darker-skinned Dravidians.
Over time Aryans and Dravidians mixed, mingled, interacted, and intermarried to the
point that distinguishing between them was impossible. Nevertheless, in early Vedic
times differences between the two peoples probably prompted Aryans to base social
distinctions on Aryan or Dravidian ancestry.
After about 1000 B.C.E. the Aryans increasingly recognized four main varnas:
brahmins (priests); kshatriyas (warriors and aristocrats); vaishyas (cultivators, artisans,
and merchants); and shudras (landless peasants and serfs). Some centuries later, probably about the end of the Vedic age, they added the category of the untouchables—
people who performed dirty or unpleasant tasks, such as butchering animals or
handling dead bodies, and who theoretically became so polluted from their work
that their very touch could defile individuals of higher status. A late hymn of the Rig
Veda, composed probably around 1000 B.C.E., offers a priestly perspective on varna
distinctions. According to the hymn, the gods created the four varnas during the early
days of the world and produced brahmins and kshatriyas as the most honorable human
groups that would lead their societies. Thus during the late Vedic age the recognition
of varnas and theories of their origins had the effect of enhancing the status and
power of priestly and aristocratic classes.

ben06937.Ch04_086-107.qxd

8/30/07

9:08 AM

Page 97

CHAPTER 4 |

Early Societies in South Asia

Until about the sixth century B.C.E., the four varnas described Vedic society reasonably well. Because they did not live in cities and did not yet pursue many specialized occupations, the Aryans had little need for a more complicated social order. Over
the longer term, however, a much more elaborate scheme of social classification
emerged. As Vedic society became more complex and generated increasingly specialized occupations, the caste system served as the umbrella for a complicated hierarchy
of subcastes known as jati. Occupation largely determined an individual’s jati: people
working at the same or similar tasks in a given area belonged to the same subcaste, and
their offspring joined them in both occupation and jati membership. By the eighteenth
and nineteenth centuries C.E., in its most fully articulated form, the system featured
several thousand jati, which prescribed individuals’ roles in society in minute detail.
Brahmins alone divided themselves into some 1,800 jati. Even untouchables belonged
to jati, and some of them looked down upon others as far more miserable and polluted than themselves.
Castes and subcastes deeply influenced the lives of individual Indians through
much of history. Members of a jati ate with one another and intermarried, and they
cared for those who became ill or fell on hard times. Elaborate rules dictated forms
of address and specific behavior appropriate for communication between members of
different castes and subcastes. Violation of jati rules could result in expulsion from
the larger group. That penalty was serious, since an outcaste individual could not
function well and sometimes could not even survive when shunned by all members
of the larger society.
The caste system never functioned in an absolutely rigid or inflexible manner but,
rather, operated so as to accommodate social change. Indeed, if the system had entirely
lacked the capacity to change and reflect new social conditions, it would have disappeared. Individual vaishyas or shudras occasionally turned to new lines of work and
prospered on the basis of their initiative, for example, and individual brahmins or kshatriyas sometimes fell on hard times, lost their positions of honor, and moved down in
the social hierarchy. More often, however, social mobility came about as the result of
group rather than individual efforts, as members of jati improved their condition collectively. Achieving upward mobility was not an easy matter—it often entailed moving
to a new area or at least taking on a new line of work—but the possibility of improving
individual or group status helped to dissipate tensions that otherwise might have severely tested Indian society.
The caste system also enabled foreign peoples to find a place in Indian society. The
Aryans were by no means the only foreigners to cross the passes of the Hindu Kush
and enter India. Many others followed them over the course of the centuries and, upon
arrival, sooner or later organized themselves into well-defined groups and adopted
caste identities.
By the end of the Vedic age, caste distinctions had become central institutions in
Aryan India. Whereas in other lands, states and empires maintained public order, in
India the caste system served as a principal foundation of social organization. Individuals have often identified more closely with their jati than with their cities or states, and
castes have played a large role in maintaining social discipline in India.

The Development of Patriarchal Society
While building an elaborate social hierarchy on the foundations of caste and varna
distinctions, the Aryans also constructed a strongly patriarchal social order on the
basis of gender distinctions. At the time of their migrations into India, men already
dominated Aryan society. All priests, warriors, and tribal chiefs were men, and the

Subcastes and Jati

Caste and
Social Mobility

97

ben06937.Ch04_086-107.qxd

98

PART I |

8/30/07

9:08 AM

Page 98

The Early Complex Societies, 3500 to 500 B.C.E.

Sources from the Past
The Rig Veda on the Origin of the Castes
Priests compiled the Rig Veda over a period of half a millennium, and the work inevitably reflects changing conditions
of Aryan India. One of the later hymns of the Rig Veda offers a brief account of the world’s creation and the origin of
the four castes (varnas). The creation came when the gods sacrificed Purusha, a primeval being who existed before the
universe and brought the world with all its creatures and features into being. The late date of this hymn suggests that the
Aryans began to recognize the four castes about 1000 B.C.E. The hymn clearly reflects the interests of the brahmin priests
who composed it.
A thousand heads hath Purusha, a thousand eyes, a
thousand feet.
He covered earth on every side and spread ten finger’s breadth beyond.
This Purusha is all that hath been and all that is to be,
The Lord of Immortality which waxes greater still
by food.
So mighty is his greatness; yea, greater than this is
Purusha.
All creatures are one-fourth of him, [the other]
three-fourths [of him are] eternal life in heaven. . . .
When the gods prepared the sacrifice with Purusha
as their offering,
Its oil was spring, the holy gift was autumn; summer was the wood. . . .
From that great general sacrifice the dripping fat
was gathered up.
He formed the creatures of the air, and animals
both wild and tame.
From that great general sacrifice [sages] and [ritual
hymns] were born.
Therefrom were [spells and charms] produced; the
Yajas [a book of ritual formulas] had its birth from it.
From it were horses born; from it all creatures with
two rows of teeth.

From it were generated [cattle], from it the goats
and sheep were born.
When they divided Purusha, how many portions
did they make?
What do they call his mouth, his arms? What do
they call his thighs and feet?
The brahmin was his mouth, of both his arms was
the kshatriya made.
His thighs became the vaishya, from his feet the
shudra was produced.
The moon was gendered from his mind, and from
his eye the sun had birth;
Indra and Agni [the god of fire] from his mouth
were born, and Vayu [the wind] from his breath.
Forth from his navel came mid-air; the sky was
fashioned from his head;
Earth from his feet, and from his ear the regions.
Thus they formed the worlds.
FOR FURTHER REFLECTION

How does this passage from the Rig Veda compare
with accounts of the world’s creation offered by other
religious and scientific traditions?

SOURCE: Ralph T. Griffith, trans. The Hymns of the Rigveda, 4 vols., 2nd ed. Benares: E. J. Lazarus, 1889–92,
4:289–93. (Translation slightly modified.)

Aryans recognized descent through the male line. Women influenced affairs within
their families but enjoyed no public authority. By maintaining and reinforcing gender
distinctions, the Aryans established a patriarchal social order that stood alongside the
caste system and varna hierarchy as a prominent feature of their society.
As the Aryans settled in agricultural communities throughout India, they maintained a thoroughly patriarchal society. Only males could inherit property, unless a
family had no male heirs, and only men could preside over family rituals that honored departed ancestors. Because they had no priestly responsibilities, women rarely

ben06937.Ch04_086-107.qxd

8/30/07

9:08 AM

Page 99

CHAPTER 4 |

Early Societies in South Asia

learned the Vedas, and formal education in Sanskrit remained almost exclusively a male preserve.
The patriarchal spokesmen of Vedic society sought to
place women explicitly under the authority of men. During
the first century B.C.E. or perhaps somewhat later, an anonymous sage prepared a work and attributed it to Manu,
founder of the human race according to Indian mythology.
Much of the work, known as the Lawbook of Manu, dealt
with proper moral behavior and social relationships, including sex and gender relationships. Although composed after
the Vedic age, the Lawbook of Manu reflected the society
constructed earlier under Aryan influence. The author advised men to treat women with honor and respect, but he
insisted that women remain subject to the guidance of the
principal men in their lives—first their fathers, then their
husbands, and, finally, if they survived their husbands, their
sons. The Lawbook also specified that the most important
duties of women were to bear children and maintain wholesome homes for their families.
Thus, like Mesopotamian, Egyptian, and other early agricultural societies, Vedic India constructed and maintained a
deeply patriarchal social order. One Indian custom demonstrated in especially dramatic fashion the dependence of
women on their men—the practice of sati (or, suttee), by
This greenish-blue
which a widow voluntarily threw herself on the funeral pyre
schist carving illusof her deceased husband to join him in death. Although widtrates the devotion of
ows occasionally entered the fires during the Vedic age and
a mother to her child.
in later centuries, sati never became a popular or widely practiced custom in India. Nevertheless, moralists often recommended sati for widows of
socially prominent men, since their example would effectively illustrate the devotion of
women to their husbands and reinforce the value that Indian society placed on the
subordination of women.

The Lawbook
of Manu

Sati

Religion in the Vedic Age
As the caste system emerged and helped to organize Indian society, distinctive cultural and religious traditions also took shape. The Aryans entered India with traditions and beliefs that met the needs of a mobile and often violent society. During the
early centuries after their arrival in India, those inherited traditions served them well
as they fought to establish a place for themselves in the subcontinent. As they spread
throughout India and mixed with the Dravidians, however, the Aryans encountered
new religious ideas that they considered intriguing and persuasive. The resulting fusion of Aryan traditions with Dravidian beliefs and values laid the foundation for Hinduism, a faith immensely popular in India and parts of southeast Asia for more than
two millennia.

Aryan Religion
As in Mesopotamia, Egypt, and other lands, religious values in India reflected the larger
society. During the early centuries following their migrations, for example, the Aryans

sati (suh-tee)

99

ben06937.Ch04_086-107.qxd

100

PART I |

Aryan Gods

Ritual Sacrifices

Spirituality

8/30/07

9:08 AM

Page 100

The Early Complex Societies, 3500 to 500 B.C.E.

spread through the Punjab and other parts of India, often fighting with the Dravidians
and even among themselves. The hymns, songs, and prayers collected in the Rig Veda
throw considerable light on Aryan values during this period.
The chief deity of the Rig Veda was Indra, the boisterous and often violent character who was partial both to fighting and to strong drink. Indra was primarily a war god.
The Aryans portrayed him as the wielder of thunderbolts who led them into battle
against their enemies. Indra also had a domestic dimension: the Aryans associated him
with the weather and especially with the coming of rain to water the crops and the
land. The Aryans also recognized a host of other deities, including gods of the sun, the
sky, the moon, fire, health, disease, dawn, and the underworld. The preeminence of
Indra, however, reflects the instability and turbulence of early Vedic society.
Although the Aryans accorded high respect to Indra and his military leadership,
their religion did not neglect ethics. They believed that the god Varuna presided over
the sky from his heavenly palace, where he oversaw the behavior of mortals and preserved the cosmic order. Varuna and his helpers despised lying and evil deeds of all
sorts, and they afflicted malefactors with severe punishments, including disease and
death. They dispatched the souls of serious evildoers to the subterranean House of
Clay, a dreary and miserable realm of punishment, while allowing souls of the virtuous
to enter the Aryan heaven known as the World of the Fathers.
Yet that ethical concern was a relatively
minor aspect of Aryan religion during early
Vedic times. Far more important from a
practical point of view was the proper performance of ritual sacrifices by which the
Aryans hoped to win the favor of the gods.
By the time the Aryans entered India, those
sacrifices had become complex and elaborate affairs. They involved the slaughter of
dozens and sometimes even hundreds of
specially prepared animals—cattle, sheep,
goats, and horses from the Aryans’ herds—
as priests spoke the sacred and mysterious
chants and worshipers partook of soma, a
hallucinogenic concoction that produced
sensations of power and divine inspiration.
The Aryans believed that during the sacrificial event their gods visited the earth and
joined the worshipers in ritual eating and
drinking. By pleasing the gods with frequent and large sacrifices, the Aryans expected to gain divine support that would
ensure military success, large families, long
life, and abundant herds of cattle. But those
rewards required constant attention to religious ritual: proper honor for the gods
called for households to have brahmins perAccompanied by an attendant bearing
form no fewer than five sacrifices per day—
his banner and weapons, Indra rides an
a time-consuming and expensive obligation.
elephant that carries him through the
Later in the Vedic age, Aryan religious
clouds, while a king and a crowd of
thought underwent a remarkable evolupeople in the landscape below worship
a sacred tree.
tion. As the centuries passed, many Aryans

ben06937.Ch04_086-107.qxd

8/30/07

9:08 AM

Page 101

CHAPTER 4 |

Early Societies in South Asia

101

became dissatisfied with the sacrificial cults of the Vedas, which increasingly seemed
like sterile and mechanical rituals rather than a genuine means of communicating with
the gods. Even brahmins sometimes became disenchanted with rituals that did not
satisfy spiritual longings. Beginning about 800 B.C.E. many thoughtful individuals left
their villages and retreated to the forests of the Ganges valley, where they lived as hermits and reflected on the relationships between human beings, the world, and the
gods. They contemplated the Vedas and sought mystical understandings of the texts,
and they attracted disciples who also thirsted for a spiritually fulfilling faith.
These mystics drew considerable inspiration from the religious beliefs of Dravidian
peoples, who often worshiped nature spirits that they associated with fertility and the
generation of new life. Dravidians also believed that human souls took on new physical
forms after the deaths of their bodily hosts. Sometimes souls returned as plants or animals, sometimes in the bodily shell of newborn humans. The notion that souls could
experience transmigration and reincarnation—that an individual soul could depart one
body at death and become associated with another body through a new birth—intrigued thoughtful people and encouraged them to try to understand the principles
that governed the fate of souls. As a result, a remarkable tradition of religious speculation emerged.

The Blending of Aryan and Dravidian Values
Traces of that tradition appear in the Vedas, but it achieved its fullest development in a
body of works known as the Upanishads, which began to appear late in the Vedic age,
about 800 to 400 B.C.E. (Later Upanishads continued to appear until the fifteenth century C.E., but the most important were those composed during the late Vedic age.)
The word upanishad literally means “a sitting in front of,” and it refers to the practice
of disciples gathering before a sage for discussion of religious issues. Most of the disciples were men, but not all. Gargi Vakaknavi, for example, was a woman who drove
the eminent sage Yajnavalkya to exasperation because he could not answer her persistent questions. The Upanishads often took the form of dialogues that explored the
Vedas and the religious issues that they raised.
The Upanishads taught that appearances are deceiving, that individual human beings in fact are not separate and autonomous creatures. Instead, each person participates in a larger cosmic order and forms a small part of a universal soul, known as
Brahman. Whereas the physical world is a theater of change, instability, and illusion,
Brahman is an eternal, unchanging, permanent foundation for all things that exist—
hence the only genuine reality. The authors of the Upanishads believed that individual
souls were born into the physical world not once, but many times: they believed that
souls appeared most often as humans, but sometimes as animals, and possibly even occasionally as plants or other vegetable matter. The highest goal of the individual soul,
however, was to escape this cycle of birth and rebirth and enter into permanent union
with Brahman.
The Upanishads developed several specific doctrines to explain this line of thought.
One was the doctrine of samsara, which held that upon death, individual souls go temporarily to the World of the Fathers and then return to earth in a new incarnation. Another was the doctrine of karma, which accounted for the specific incarnations that
souls experienced. The Brhadaranyaka Upanishad offers a succinct explanation of the
workings of karma: “Now as a man is like this or like that, according as he acts and according as he behaves, so will he be: a man of good acts will become good, a man of
bad acts, bad. He becomes pure by pure deeds, bad by bad deeds.” Thus individuals
who lived virtuous lives and fulfilled all their duties could expect rebirth into a purer

The Upanishads

Brahman, the
Universal Soul

Teachings of
the Upanishads

Upanishads (oo-PAHN-eeshahds)

ben06937.Ch04_086-107.qxd

102

PART I |

8/30/07

9:08 AM

Page 102

The Early Complex Societies, 3500 to 500 B.C.E.

Sources from the Past
The Mundaka Upanishad on the Nature of Brahman
Indian commentators often spoke of the Mundaka Upanishad as “the shaving Upanishad” because, like a razor, it cut
off errors arising in the mind. Its purpose was to teach knowledge of Brahman, which it held was not accessible through
sacrifices, rites, or even worship. Only proper instruction would bring understanding of Brahman.
Brahma was before the gods were, the Creator of all, the
Guardian of the Universe. The vision of Brahman, the
foundation of all wisdom, he gave in revelation to his
first-born son Atharvan.
That vision and wisdom of Brahman given to Atharvan, he in olden times revealed to Angira. And Angira
gave it to Satyavaha, who in succession revealed it to
Angiras.
Now there was a man whose name was Saunaka,
owner of a great household, who, approaching one day
Angiras with reverence, asked him this question: “Master, what is that which, when known, all is known?” The
Master replied: Sages say there are two kinds of wisdom,
the higher and the lower.
The lower wisdom is in the four sacred Vedas, and in
the six kinds of knowledge that help to know, to sing,
and to use the Vedas: definition and grammar, pronunciation and poetry, ritual and the signs of heaven. But the
higher wisdom is that which leads to the Eternal [i.e.,
Brahman].
He is beyond thought and invisible, beyond family
and colour. He has neither eyes nor ears; he has neither
hands nor feet. He is everlasting and omnipresent, infinite in the great and infinite in the small. He is the Eternal whom the sages see as the source of all creation.
Even as a spider sends forth and draws in its thread,
even as plants arise from the earth and hairs from the
body of man, even so the whole creation arises from the
Eternal.
By Tapas, the power of meditation, Brahman attains
expansion and then comes primeval matter. And from
this comes life and mind, the elements and the worlds
and the immortality of ritual action.
From that Spirit [Brahman] who knows all and sees
all, whose Tapas is pure vision, from him comes [the
SOURCE:

god] Brahma, the creator, name and form and primal
matter. . . .
This is the truth: As from a fire aflame thousands of
sparks come forth, even so from the Creator an infinity
of beings have life and to him return again.
But the spirit of light above form, never-born,
within all, outside all, is in radiance above life and mind,
and beyond this creation’s Creator.
From him comes all life and mind, and the senses of
all life. From him comes space and light, air and fire and
water, and this earth that holds us all.
The head of his body is fire, and his eyes the sun and
the moon; his ears, the regions of heaven, and the sacred Vedas his word. His breath is the wind that blows,
and this whole universe is his heart. The earth is his footstool. He is the Spirit that is in all things.
From him comes the sun, and the source of all fire
is the sun.
From him comes the moon, and from this comes the
rain and all herbs that grow upon earth. And man comes
from him, and man unto woman gives seed; and thus an
infinity of beings come from the Spirit supreme. . . .
From him the oceans and mountains; and all rivers
come from him. And all herbs and the essence of all
whereby the Inner Spirit dwells with the elements: all
come from him.
FOR FURTHER REFLECTION

How does the understanding of the world as articulated
in the Mundaka Upanishad compare and contrast with
the view outlined in the story of Purusha’s sacrifice as
told in the selection from the Rig Veda presented earlier?

Juan Mascaró, trans. The Upanishads. London: Penguin, 1965, pp. 75–78.

ben06937.Ch04_086-107.qxd

8/30/07

9:08 AM

Page 103

CHAPTER 4 |

Early Societies in South Asia

A cave painting from an undetermined age, perhaps several thousand years ago, shows that
early inhabitants of India lived in close company with other residents of the natural world.

and more honorable existence—for example, into a higher and more distinguished
caste. Those who accumulated a heavy burden of karma, however, would suffer in a future incarnation by being reborn into a difficult existence, or perhaps even into the
body of an animal or an insect.
Even under the best of circumstances, the cycle of rebirth involved a certain
amount of pain and suffering that inevitably accompany human existence. The authors of the Upanishads sought to escape the cycle altogether and attain the state of
moksha, which they characterized as a deep, dreamless sleep that came with permanent liberation from physical incarnation. That goal was difficult to reach, since it entailed severing all ties to the physical world and identifying with the ultimate reality of
Brahman, the universal soul. The two principal means to moksha were asceticism and
meditation. By embarking on a regime of extreme asceticism—leading extremely simple lives and denying themselves all pleasure—individuals could purge themselves of
desire for the comforts of the physical world. By practicing yoga, a form of intense
and disciplined meditation, they could concentrate on the nature of Brahman and its
relationship to their souls. Diligent efforts, then, would enable individuals to achieve
moksha by separating themselves from the physical world of change, illusion, and incarnation. Then their souls would merge with Brahman, and they would experience
eternal, peaceful ecstasy.
Just as brahmin theories about the origins of varna distinctions reflected Aryan
society about 1000 B.C.E., so the religious views of the Upanishads dovetailed with the
social order of the late Vedic age. Indeed, modern commentators have sometimes
interpreted the worldview of the Upanishads—particularly the doctrines of samsara and
karma—as a cynical ideology designed to justify the social inequalities imposed by the
caste system. The doctrines of samsara and karma certainly reinforced the Vedic social

Religion and
Vedic Society

103

ben06937.Ch04_086-107.qxd

104

PART I |

8/30/07

9:08 AM

Page 104

The Early Complex Societies, 3500 to 500 B.C.E.

order: they explained why individuals were born into their castes—because they had behaved virtuously or badly during a previous incarnation—and they encouraged individuals to observe their caste duties in hopes of enjoying a more comfortable and honorable
incarnation in the future.
It would be overly simplistic, however, to consider these doctrines merely efforts of
a hereditary elite to justify its position and maintain its hegemony over other classes of
society. The sages who gave voice to these doctrines were conscientiously attempting
to deal with genuine spiritual and intellectual problems. To them the material world
seemed supremely superficial—a realm of constant change and illusion offering no
clear sign as to the nature of ultimate reality. It seemed logical to suppose that a more
real and substantial world stood behind the one that they inhabited. Greek philosophers, Christian theologians, and many others have arrived at similar positions during
the course of the centuries. It should come as no great surprise, then, that the authors
of the Upanishads sought ultimate truth and certain knowledge in an ideal world that
transcends our own. Their formulation of concepts such as samsara and karma represented efforts to characterize the relationship between the world of physical incarnation and the realm of ultimate truth and reality.
The Upanishads not only influenced Indian thought about the nature of the
world but also called for the observance of high ethical standards. They discouraged
greed, envy, gluttony, and all manner of vice, since those traits indicated excessive attachment to the material world and insufficient concentration on union with the universal soul. The Upanishads advocated honesty, self-control, charity, and mercy. Most
of all, they encouraged the cultivation of personal integrity—a self-knowledge that
would incline individuals naturally toward both ethical behavior and union with
Brahman. The Upanishads also taught respect for all living things, animal as well as
human. Animal bodies, after all, might well hold incarnations of unfortunate souls
suffering the effects of a heavy debt of karma. Despite the evil behavior of these souls
in their earlier incarnations, devout individuals would not wish to cause them additional suffering or harm. A vegetarian diet thus became a common feature of the
ascetic regime.

L

ike sub-Saharan African and other regions of Eurasia, south Asia was a land of crosscultural interaction and exchange even in ancient times. Knowledge of agriculture

made its way to the Indian subcontinent as early as 7000 B.C.E., probably from southwest
Asia, and a productive agricultural economy made it possible for Dravidian peoples to
build a sophisticated society in the Indus River valley and to trade with peoples as far
away as Mesopotamia. The arrival of Aryan migrants led to intense and systematic interactions between peoples of markedly different social and cultural traditions. Although
they no doubt often engaged in conflicts, they also found ways of dealing with one another and living together in a common land. By the end of the Vedic age, the merging of
Aryan and Dravidian traditions had generated a distinctive Indian society. Agriculture
and herding had spread with the Aryans to most parts of the Indian subcontinent. Regional states maintained order over substantial territories and established kingship as the
most common form of government. The caste system not only endowed social groups
with a powerful sense of identity but also helped to maintain public order. A distinctive
set of religious beliefs explained the world and the role of human beings in it, and the use
of writing facilitated further reflection on spiritual and intellectual matters.

ben06937.Ch04_086-107.qxd

8/30/07

9:08 AM

Page 105

CHAPTER 4 |

Early Societies in South Asia

105

C H R O N O L O G Y
8000–7000 B.C.E.

Beginnings of agriculture in south Asia

2500–2000 B.C.E.

High point of Harappan society

1900 B.C.E.

Beginning of Harappan decline

1500 B.C.E.

Beginning of Aryan migration to India

1500–500 B.C.E.

Vedic age

1400–900 B.C.E.

Composition of the Rig Veda

1000 B.C.E.

Early Aryan migrations into the Ganges River valley

1000 B.C.E.

Emergence of varna distinctions

1000–500 B.C.E.

Formation of regional kingdoms in northern India

800–400 B.C.E.

Composition of the principal Upanishads

750 B.C.E.

Establishment of first Aryan cities in the Ganges valley

500 B.C.E.

Early Aryan migrations to the Deccan Plateau

F O R

F U R T H E R

R E A D I N G

Bridget and Raymond Allchin. The Rise of Civilization in India
and Pakistan. Cambridge, 1982. A detailed and authoritative survey of early Indian society based largely on archaeological evidence.
F. R. Allchin. The Archaeology of Early Historic South Asia: The
Emergence of Cities and States. Cambridge, 1995. A collection of scholarly essays on the roles of cities and states in ancient India.
A. L. Basham. The Wonder That Was India. New York, 1954. A
popular survey by a leading scholar of ancient India.
Ainslie T. Embree, ed. Sources of Indian Tradition. 2 vols. 2nd
ed. New York, 1988. An important collection of primary
sources in translation.
Walter A. Fairservis. The Roots of Ancient India. 2nd ed. Chicago,
1975. A judicious analysis of ancient Indian society, especially
Harappan society, based on archaeological excavations.

Jonathan Mark Kenoyer. Ancient Cities of the Indus Valley Civilization. Oxford, 1998. A well-illustrated volume that synthesizes recent archaeological and linguistic scholarship on
Harappan society.
J. P. Mallory. In Search of the Indo-Europeans: Language, Archaeology, and Myth. London, 1989. Carefully reviews modern
theories about early Indo-European speakers in light of both
the linguistic and the archaeological evidence.
Juan Mascaró, trans. The Upanishads. London, 1965. A superb
English version of selected Upanishads by a gifted translator.
William H. McNeill and Jean W. Sedlar, eds. Classical India.
Oxford, 1969. A useful collection of primary sources in
translation.
Gregory Possehl, ed. Ancient Cities of the Indus. New Delhi,
1979. Collection of scholarly essays that bring the results of
archaeological research to bear on Harappan society.

ben06937.Ch04_086-107.qxd

106

PART I |

8/30/07

9:08 AM

Page 106

The Early Complex Societies, 3500 to 500 B.C.E.

———, ed. Harappan Civilization: A Recent Perspective. 2nd ed.
New Delhi, 1993. Offers a variety of revisionist interpretations of Harappan society.
Shereen Ratnagar. Encounters: The Westerly Trade of the Harappan
Civilization. Delhi, 1981. Relies on archaeological discoveries
in examining commercial relations between Harappan society
and Mesopotamia.
Romila Thapar. Early India: From the Origins to A.D. 1300. Berkeley, 2003. A fresh view by one of the leading scholars of early
Indian history.

Mortimer Wheeler. Civilizations of the Indus Valley and Beyond.
London, 1966. A clear and succinct survey by a leading
archaeologist.
———. My Archaeological Mission to India and Pakistan. London, 1976. Reflections and personal experiences of the former Head of the Archaeological Survey of India.
Stanley Wolpert. A New History of India. 7th ed. New York,
2004. A concise and readable survey of Indian history.

ben06937.Ch04_086-107.qxd

8/30/07

9:08 AM

Page 107


