East Asia

Page 109

Political Organization in Early China
Early Agricultural Society and the Xia Dynasty
The Shang Dynasty
The Zhou Dynasty

Early Chinese Writing
and Cultural Development
Oracle Bones and Early Chinese Writing
Thought and Literature in Ancient China

Society and Family in Ancient China

Ancient China and the Larger World

The Social Order
Family and Patriarchy

Chinese Cultivators and Nomadic Peoples of Central Asia
The Southern Expansion of Chinese Society

Ancient Chinese legends tell the stories of heroic figures who invented agriculture, domesticated animals, taught people to marry and live in families, created music, introduced the calendar, and instructed people in the arts and crafts. Most important of these heroes were three
sage-kings—Yao, Shun, and Yu—who laid the foundations of Chinese society. King Yao was a
towering figure, sometimes associated with a mountain, who was extraordinarily modest,
sincere, and respectful. Yao’s virtuous influence brought harmony to his family, the larger society, and ultimately all the states of China. King Shun succeeded Yao and continued his work
by ordering the four seasons of the year and instituting uniform weights, measures, and units
of time.
Most dashing of the sage-kings was Yu, a vigorous and tireless worker who rescued China
from the raging waters of the flooding Yellow River. Before Yu, according to the legends, experts tried to control the Yellow River’s floods by building dikes to contain its waters. The
river was much too large and strong for the dikes, however, and when it broke through them
it unleashed massive floods. Yu abandoned the effort to dam the Yellow River and organized
two alternative strategies. He dredged the river so as to deepen its channel and minimize the
likelihood of overflows, and he dug canals parallel to the river so that flood waters would
flow harmlessly to the sea without devastating the countryside.
The legends say that Yu worked on the river for thirteen years without ever returning home.
Once he passed by the gate to his home and heard his wife and children crying out of loneliness, but he continued on his way rather than interrupt his flood-control work. Because he
tamed the Yellow River and made it possible to cultivate rice and millet, Yu became a popular
hero. Poets praised the man who protected fields and villages from deadly and destructive
floods. Historians reported that he led the waters to the sea in a manner as orderly as lords
proceeding to a formal reception. Eventually Yu succeeded King Shun as leader of the Chinese
people. Indeed, he founded the Xia dynasty, the first ruling house of ancient China.
The legends of Yao, Shun, and Yu no doubt exaggerated the virtues and deeds of the sagekings. Agriculture, arts, crafts, marriage, family, government, and means of water control developed over an extended period of time, and no single individual was responsible for introducing
them into China. Yet legends about early heroic figures reflected the interest of a people in the
practices and customs that defined their society. At the same time, the moral thinkers who
transmitted the legends used them to advocate values they considered beneficial for their society. By exalting Yao, Shun, and Yu as exemplars of virtue, Chinese moralists promoted the values of social harmony and selfless, dedicated work that the sage-kings represented.

OPPOSITE:

Bronze axe featuring a ferocious human face from the late Shang dynasty.

109

ben06937.Ch05_108-131.qxd

110

PART I |

7/27/07

7:58 AM

Page 110

The Early Complex Societies, 3500 to 500 B.C.E.
Human beings appeared in east Asia as early as four hundred thousand years ago. At that
early date they used stone tools and relied on a hunting and gathering economy like their
counterparts in other regions of the earth. As in Mesopotamia, Egypt, and India, however, population pressures in east Asia encouraged communities to experiment with agriculture. Peoples
of southern China and southeast Asia domesticated rice after about 7000 B.C.E., and by 5000 B.C.E.
neolithic villages throughout the valley of the Yangzi River (Chang Jiang) depended on rice as
the staple item in their diet. During the same era, millet came under cultivation farther north, in
the valley of the Yellow River (Huang He), where neolithic communities flourished by 5000 B.C.E.
In later centuries wheat and barley made their way from Mesopotamia to northern China, and
by 2000 B.C.E. they supplemented millet as staple foods of the region.
Agricultural surpluses supported numerous neolithic communities throughout east Asia.
During the centuries after 3000 B.C.E., residents of the Yangzi River and Yellow River valleys
lived in agricultural villages and communicated and traded with others throughout the region.
During the second millennium B.C.E., they began to establish cities, build large states, and construct distinctive social and cultural traditions. Three dynastic states based in the Yellow River
valley brought much of China under their authority and forged many local communities into a
larger Chinese society. Sharp social distinctions emerged in early Chinese society, and patriarchal family heads exercised authority in both public and private affairs. A distinctive form of
writing supported the development of sophisticated cultural traditions. Meanwhile, Chinese
cultivators had frequent dealings with peoples from other societies, particularly with nomadic
herders inhabiting the grassy steppes of central Asia. Migrating frequently on the steppes, nomadic peoples linked China with lands to the west and brought knowledge of bronze and iron
metallurgy, horse-drawn chariots, and wheeled vehicles to east Asia. As in early Mesopotamia,
Egypt, and India, then, complex society in east Asia promoted the development of distinctive
social and cultural traditions in the context of cross-cultural interaction and exchange.

Political Organization in Early China
As agricultural populations expanded, villages and towns flourished throughout the
Yellow River and Yangzi River valleys. Originally, those settlements looked after their
own affairs and organized local states that maintained order in small territories. By the
late years of the third millennium B.C.E., however, much larger regional states began
to emerge. Among the most important were those of the Xia, Shang, and Zhou dynasties, which progressively brought much of China under their authority and laid a
political foundation for the development of a distinctive Chinese society.

Early Agricultural Society and the Xia Dynasty
The Yellow River

Yangzi (YAHNG-zuh)
Xia (SHYAH)
Zhou (JOH)

Like the Indus, the Yellow River is boisterous and unpredictable. It rises in the mountains bordering the high plateau of Tibet, and it courses almost 4,700 kilometers
(2,920 miles) before emptying into the Yellow Sea. It takes its name, Huang He, meaning “Yellow River,” from the vast quantities of light-colored loess soil that it picks up
along its route. Loess is an extremely fine, powderlike soil that was deposited on the
plains of northern China, as well as in several other parts of the world, after the retreat
of the glaciers at the end of the last ice age, about twelve thousand to fifteen thousand
years ago. So much loess becomes suspended in the Yellow River that the water turns
yellow and the river takes on the consistency of a soup. The soil gradually builds up,
raising the river bed and forcing the water out of its established path. The Yellow River

ben06937.Ch05_108-131.qxd

7/27/07

7:58 AM

Page 111

CHAPTER 5 |

Early Society in East Asia

periodically unleashes a tremendous flood that devastates fields, communities, and anything else in its way. The Yellow River has altered its course many times and has caused
so much destruction that it has earned the nickname “China’s Sorrow.”
Yet geographic conditions have also supported the development of complex society in China. During most years, there is enough rainfall for crops, so early cultivators
had no need to build complex irrigation systems like those of Mesopotamia. They invested a great deal of labor, however, in dredging the river and building dikes, in a
partially successful effort to limit the flood damage. Loess soil is extremely fertile and
easy to work, so even before the introduction of metal tools, cultivators using wooden
implements could bring in generous harvests.
Abundant harvests in northern China supported the development of several neolithic societies during the centuries after 5000 B.C.E. Each developed its own style of
pottery and architecture, and each likely had its own political, social, and cultural traditions. Yangshao society, which flourished from about 5000 to 3000 B.C.E. in the middle
region of the Yellow River valley, is especially well known from the discovery in 1952
of an entire neolithic village at Banpo, near modern Xi’an. Excavations at Banpo unearthed a large quantity of fine painted pottery and bone tools used by early cultivators
in the sixth and fifth millennia B.C.E.
As human population increased, settlements like that at Banpo cropped up
throughout much of China, in the valley of the Yangzi River as well as the Yellow
River. In east Asia, as in other parts of the world, the concentration of people in small
areas brought a need for recognized authorities who could maintain order, resolve
disputes, and organize public works projects. Village-level organization sufficed for
purely local affairs, but it did little to prevent or resolve conflicts between villages
and did not have the authority to organize large-scale projects in the interests of the
larger community.
Chinese legends speak of three ancient dynasties—the Xia, the Shang, and the
Zhou—that arose before the Qin and Han dynasties brought China under unified
rule in the third century B.C.E. The Xia, Shang, and Zhou dynasties were hereditary
states that extended their control over progressively larger regions, although none of
them embraced all the territory claimed by later Chinese dynasties. Large numbers of
written accounts survive to throw light on the Zhou dynasty, which scholars have
long recognized as a historical ruling
house. Until recently, however, information about the Xia and Shang dynasties
came from legendary accounts that scholars mostly did not trust. As a result, many
historians dismissed reports of the Xia and
the Shang dynasties as mythical fantasies.
Only in the later twentieth century did archaeological excavations turn up evidence
that the Xia and the Shang were indeed
historical dynasties rather than figments of
ancient imaginations.
Archaeological study of the Xia dynasty
is still in its early stages. Nevertheless, durPottery bowl from the early Yangshao
ing the past few decades, archaeological
era excavated at Banpo, near modern
discoveries have suggested that the Xia dyXi’an. The bowl is fine red pottery
nasty made one of the first efforts to orgadecorated with masks and fishnets
in black.
nize public life in China on a large scale.

111

Yangshao Society
and Banpo Village

The Xia Dynasty

ben06937.Ch05_108-131.qxd

112

PART I |

7/27/07

7:58 AM

Page 112

The Early Complex Societies, 3500 to 500 B.C.E.

RE

ua

A

Y

O

ell
ow
ng H
e)

K

(H

Yin
Hao

Yellow
Sea

Anyang

Ao
Erlitou
ng
Ji

)

a

Luoyang
Sanxingdui Yangzi

( Chang

East
China
Sea

Echang
Mawangdui

Xia
Shang
Zhou

Sou

th

in
Ch
0
0

ea
aS
500 mi

250
500

1000 km

Map 5.1 The Xia, Shang, and Zhou dynasties, 2200–256 B.C.E.
Note that the three dynasties extended their territorial reach through time.
How might technological considerations explain the increasing size of
early Chinese states?

Although it was not the only early state in China, the
Xia was certainly one of the more vigorous states of its
time. Most likely the dynasty came into being about
2200 B.C.E. in roughly the same region as the Yangshao society. By extending formal control over this region, the Xia dynasty established a precedent for
hereditary monarchical rule in China.
Ancient legends credit the dynasty’s founder, the
sage-king Yu, with the organization of effective floodcontrol projects: thus here, as in Mesopotamia and
Egypt, the need to organize large-scale public works
projects helped to establish recognized authorities and
formal political institutions. Although no information
survives about the political institutions of the Xia, the
dynasty’s rulers probably exercised power throughout
the middle Yellow River valley by controlling the leaders of individual villages. The dynasty encouraged the
founding of cities and the development of metallurgy,
since the ruling classes needed administrative centers
and bronze weapons to maintain their control. The
recently excavated city of Erlitou, near Luoyang,
might well have been the capital of the Xia dynasty.
Excavations have shown that the city featured a large,
palace-type structure as well as more modest houses,
pottery workshops, and a bronze foundry.

The Shang Dynasty

Bronze Metallurgy
and Horse-Drawn
Chariots

Xinjiang (sing-jyahng)

According to the legends, the last Xia king was an oppressive despot who lost his
realm to the founder of the Shang dynasty. In fact, the Xia state did not entirely collapse and did not disappear so much as it gave way gradually before the Shang, which
arose in a region to the south and east of the Xia realm. Tradition assigns the Shang
dynasty to the period 1766 to 1122 B.C.E., and archaeological discoveries have largely
confirmed those dates. Because the Shang dynasty left written records as well as material remains, the basic features of early Chinese society come into much clearer focus
than they did during the Xia.
Technology helps to explain the rise and success of the Shang dynasty. Bronze metallurgy transformed Chinese society during Shang times and indeed may well have enabled Shang rulers to displace the Xia dynasty. Bronze metallurgy went to China from
southwest Asia, together with horses, horse-drawn chariots, carts, wagons, and other
wheeled vehicles. This collection of related technologies traveled to China as well as
India with the early Indo-European migrants (discussed in chapter 2), some of whom
made their way to the Tarim Basin (now Xinjiang province in western China) as early
as 2000 B.C.E. Early Chinese chariots were close copies of Indo-European chariots
from the Iranian plateau, and ancient Chinese words for wheels, spokes, axles, and
chariots all derived from Indo-European roots.
Bronze metallurgy reached China before the Shang dynasty, and indeed the Xia dynasty had already made limited use of bronze tools and weapons. But Shang ruling
elites managed to monopolize the production of bronze in the Yellow River valley by
controlling access to copper and tin ores. They also dramatically expanded production
by employing government craftsmen to turn out large quantities of bronze axes, spears,

ben06937.Ch05_108-131.qxd

7/27/07

7:58 AM

Page 113

CHAPTER 5 |

Early Society in East Asia

113

knives, and arrowheads exclusively for
the Shang rulers and their armies. Control over bronze production strengthened Shang forces against those of the
Xia and provided them with arms far
superior to stone, wood, and bone weapons wielded by their rivals.
Shang nobles also used bronze to
make fittings for their horse-drawn chariots, which began to appear in China
between about 1500 and 1200 B.C.E.
Like the Aryans in India, Shang warriors
used these vehicles to devastating effect
against adversaries who lacked horses
and chariots. With their arsenal of bronze
weapons, Shang armies had little difficulty imposing their rule on agricultural
villages and extending their influence
throughout much of the Yellow River
valley. Meanwhile, because the ruling
elites did not permit free production of
bronze, potential rebels or competitors
had little hope of resisting Shang forces
and even less possibility of displacing
the dynasty.
Shang kings extended their rule to a
large portion of northeastern China
centered on the modern-day province
of Henan. Like state builders in other
A tomb from the early Zhou dynasty containing the remains of horses
parts of the world, the kings claimed a
and war chariots, which transformed military affairs in ancient China.
generous portion of the surplus agricultural production from the regions they
controlled and then used that surplus to support military forces, political allies, and
others who could help them maintain their rule. Shang rulers clearly had abundant
military force at their disposal. Surviving records mention armies of 3,000, 5,000,
10,000, and even 13,000 troops, and one report mentions the capture of 30,000
enemy troops. Although those numbers are probably somewhat inflated, they still
suggest that Shang rulers maintained a powerful military machine.
Like their Xia predecessors, Shang rulers also relied on a large corps of political Shang Political
allies. They did not rule a centralized state. Rather, their authority rested on a vast net- Organization
work of walled towns whose local rulers recognized the authority of the Shang kings.
During the course of the dynasty, Shang kings may have controlled one thousand or
more towns. Apart from local rulers of those towns, others who shared the agricultural
surplus of Shang China included advisors, ministers, craftsmen, and metalsmiths, who
in their various ways helped Shang rulers shape policy or spread their influence
throughout their realm.
Shang society revolved around several large cities. According to tradition, the Shang
capital moved six times during the course of the dynasty. Though originally chosen for
political and military reasons, in each case the capital also became an important social,
economic, and cultural center—the site not only of administration and military command but also of bronze foundries, arts, crafts, trade, and religious observances.

ben06937.Ch05_108-131.qxd

114

PART I |

7/27/07

7:58 AM

Page 114

The Early Complex Societies, 3500 to 500 B.C.E.

Jade figurines excavated at Anyang from the tomb of Fu Hao, who was one of the consorts of the Shang king Wu Ding.
The carvings represent servants who would tend to Fu Hao’s needs after death.

The Shang Capital
at Ao

The Shang Capital
at Yin

Excavations at two sites have revealed much about the workings of the Shang dynasty. The Shang named one of its earliest capitals Ao, and archaeologists have found its
remains near modern Zhengzhou. The most remarkable feature of this site is the city
wall, which originally stood at least 10 meters (33 feet) high, with a base some 20 meters (66 feet) thick. The wall consisted of layer upon layer of pounded earth—soil packed
firmly between wooden forms and then pounded with mallets until it reached rocklike
hardness before the addition of a new layer of soil on top. This building technique, still
used in the countryside of northern China, can produce structures of tremendous durability. Even today, for example, parts of the wall of Ao survive to a height of 3 to 4 meters (10 to 13 feet). The investment in labor required to build this wall testifies to Shang
power and a high degree of centralized rule: modern estimates suggest that the wall required the services of some ten thousand laborers working almost twenty years.
Even more impressive than Ao is the site of Yin, near modern Anyang, which was
the capital during the last two or three centuries of the Shang dynasty. Archaeologists
working at Yin have identified a complex of royal palaces, archives with written documents, several residential neighborhoods, two large bronze foundries, several workshops used by potters, woodworkers, bone carvers, and other craftsmen, and scattered
burial grounds.
Eleven large and lavish tombs constructed for Shang kings, as well as other, more
modest, tombs, have received particular attention. Like the resting places of the Egyptian
pharaohs, most of these tombs attracted grave robbers soon after their construction.
Enough remains, however, to show that the later Shang kings continued to command
the high respect enjoyed by their predecessors at Ao. The graves included thousands of
objects—chariots, weapons, bronze goods, pottery, carvings of jade and ivory, cowry
shells (which served both as money and as exotic ornamentation), and sacrifical victims,
including dogs, horses, and scores of human beings intended to serve the deceased royals
in another existence. One tomb alone contained skeletons of more than three hundred

ben06937.Ch05_108-131.qxd

7/27/07

7:58 AM

Page 115

CHAPTER 5 |

Early Society in East Asia

sacrificial victims—probably wives, servants, friends, and hunting companions—who joined the Shang king in death.
Most important of the tombs at Yin is the sepulcher of
Fu Hao, one of sixty-four consorts (wives) of the Shang king
Wu Ding, who ruled in the thirteenth century B.C.E. Fu
Hao’s resting place is the only tomb at Yin to escape the notice of grave robbers—perhaps because it was located in the
Shang palace rather than in the cemetery that held other
royal tombs. In any case, after her burial about 1250 B.C.E.,
Fu Hao’s tomb remained undisturbed for more than three
thousand years until Chinese archaeologists discovered it and
excavated it in 1976.
Fu Hao was King Wu Ding’s favorite consort, and her
tomb reflected her status. It contained 468 bronze objects,
including 130 weapons, 23 bells, and 4 mirrors. In combination, the bronze items in her tomb weighed about 1,600
kilograms (3,500 pounds). Metalsmiths would have required
some 11 tons of ore to produce these objects. In an age when
bronze was extremely expensive and hence rare, Fu Hao and
the Shang royal family were conspicuous consumers of that
valuable commodity. Quite apart from bronzewares, Fu
Hao’s tomb contained 755 jade carvings, 564 bone carvings,
5 finely carved ivory cups, 11 pottery objects, and 6,900
cowry shells. Moreover, the tomb held the remains of six
dogs and the skeletons of sixteen human beings—sacrificial
victims buried with Fu Hao to guard her and attend to her
needs after death. Fu Hao’s unlooted tomb has thrown valuable light on the Shang dynasty and the resources that were
available to residents of the royal court.
A life-size bronze
Like the Xia state, the Shang realm was only one of many
statue, produced about
that organized public life in ancient China. Legendary and
1200 to 1000 B.C.E.,
historical accounts paid special attention to the Xia and
from a tomb at SanShang dynasties because of their location in the Yellow River
xingdui in southvalley, where the first Chinese imperial states rose in later
western China. Recent
archaeological distimes. But archaeological excavations are making it clear that
coveries have turned
similar states dominated other regions at the same time the
up plentiful evidence
Xia and Shang ruled the Yellow River valley. Recent excavaof early political and
tions, for example, have unearthed evidence of a very large
social organization
city at Sanxingdui in modern-day Sichuan province (southoutside the Yellow
western China). Occupied about 1700 to 1000 B.C.E., the
River valley.
city was roughly contemporaneous with the Shang dynasty,
and it probably served as capital of a regional kingdom. Like
their Xia and Shang counterparts, tombs at Sanxingdui held large quantities of bronze,
jade, stone, and pottery objects, as well as cowry shells and elephant tusks, that indicate close relationships with societies in the valleys of both the Yangzi River and the
Yellow River.

The Zhou Dynasty
Little information survives to illustrate the principles of law, justice, and administration
by which Shang rulers maintained order. They did not promulgate law codes such as
those issued in Mesopotamia but, rather, ruled by proclamation or decree, trusting

115

The Tomb of Fu Hao

Beyond the Yellow
River Valley

ben06937.Ch05_108-131.qxd

116

PART I |

7/27/07

7:58 AM

Page 116

The Early Complex Societies, 3500 to 500 B.C.E.

Rise of the Zhou

The Mandate
of Heaven

Political Organization

their military forces and political allies to enforce their will. The principles of ancient
Chinese politics and statecraft become more clear in the practices of the Zhou dynasty,
which succeeded the Shang as the preeminent political authority in northern China.
Dwelling in the Wei River valley of northwestern China (modern Shaanxi province),
the Zhou were a tough and sinewy people who battled Shang forces in the east and
nomadic raiders from the steppes in the west. Eventually the Zhou allied with the
Shang and won recognition as kings of the western regions. Because they organized
their allies more effectively than the Shang, however, they gradually eclipsed the Shang
dynasty and ultimately displaced it altogether.
Shang and Zhou ambitions collided in the late twelfth century B.C.E. According to
Zhou accounts, the last Shang king was a criminal fool who gave himself over to wine,
women, tyranny, and greed. As a result, many of the towns and political districts subject to the Shang transferred their loyalties to the Zhou. After several unsuccessful attempts to discipline the Shang king, Zhou forces seized the Shang capital of Yin,
beheaded the king, and replaced his administration with their own state in 1122 B.C.E.
The new rulers allowed Shang heirs to continue governing small districts but reserved
for themselves the right to oversee affairs throughout the realm. The new dynasty ruled
most of northern and central China, at least nominally, until 256 B.C.E.
In justifying the deposition of the Shang, spokesmen for the Zhou dynasty articulated a set of principles that have influenced Chinese thinking about government
and political legitimacy over the long term. The Zhou theory of politics rested on
the assumption that earthly events were closely related to heavenly affairs. More specifically, heavenly powers granted the right to govern—the “mandate of heaven”—to
an especially deserving individual known as the son of heaven. The ruler then served
as a link between heaven and earth. He had the duty to govern conscientiously, observe high standards of honor and justice, and maintain order and harmony within
his realm. As long as he did so, the heavenly powers would approve of his work, the
cosmos would enjoy a harmonious and well-balanced stability, and the ruling dynasty
would retain its mandate to govern. If a ruler failed in his duties, however, chaos and
suffering would afflict his realm, the cosmos would fall out of balance, and the displeased heavenly powers would withdraw the mandate to rule and transfer it to a
more deserving candidate. On the basis of that reasoning, spokesmen for the new
dynasty explained the fall of the Shang and the transfer of the mandate of heaven to
the Zhou. Until the twentieth century, Chinese ruling houses emulated the Zhou
dynasty by claiming the mandate of heaven for their rule, and emperors took the title
“son of heaven.”
The Zhou state was much larger than the Shang. In fact, it was so extensive that a
single central court could not rule the entire land effectively, at least not with the
transportation and communication technologies available during the second and first
millennia B.C.E. As a result, Zhou rulers relied on a decentralized administration: they
entrusted power, authority, and responsibility to subordinates who in return owed allegiance, tribute, and military support to the central government.
During the early days of the dynasty, that system worked reasonably well. The
conquerors continued to rule the Zhou ancestral homeland from their capital at Hao,
near modern Xi’an, but they allotted possessions in conquered territories to relatives
and other allies. The subordinates ruled their territories with limited supervision from
the central government. In return for their political rights, they visited the Zhou royal
court on specified occasions to demonstrate their continued loyalty to the dynasty,
they delivered taxes and tribute that accounted for the major part of Zhou finances,
and they provided military forces that the kings deployed in the interests of the Zhou

ben06937.Ch05_108-131.qxd

7/27/07

7:58 AM

Page 117

CHAPTER 5 |

Early Society in East Asia

state as a whole. When not already related to their subordinates, the Zhou rulers
sought to arrange marriages that would strengthen their ties to their political allies.
Despite their best efforts, however, the Zhou kings could not maintain control indefinitely over this decentralized political system. Subordinates gradually established
their own bases of power: they ruled their territories not only as allies of the Zhou
kings but also as long-established and traditional governors. They set up regional bureaucracies, armies, and tax systems, which allowed them to consolidate their rule and
exercise their authority. They promulgated law codes and enforced them with their
own forces. As they became more secure in their rule, they also became more independent of the Zhou dynasty itself. Subordinates sometimes ignored their obligations
to appear at the royal court or deliver tax proceeds. Occasionally, they refused to provide military support or even turned their forces against the dynasty in an effort to
build up their regional states.
Technological developments also worked in favor of subordinate rulers. The
Zhou kings were not able to control the production of bronze as closely as their
Shang predecessors had, and subordinates built up stockpiles of weapons. Moreover,
during the first millennium B.C.E., the technology of iron metallurgy spread to China,
and the production of iron expanded rapidly. Because iron ores are both cheaper and
more abundant than copper and tin, the Zhou kings were simply unable to monopolize iron production. As a result,
subordinates outfitted their forces
with iron weapons that enabled
them to resist the central government and pursue their interests.
In the early eighth century B.C.E.,
the Zhou rulers faced severe problems that brought the dynasty to the
point of collapse. In 771 B.C.E. nomadic peoples invaded China from
the west. They came during the rule
of a particularly ineffective king who
did not enjoy the respect of his political allies. When subordinates refused
to support the king, the invaders
overwhelmed the Zhou capital at
Hao. Following that disaster, the
royal court moved east to Luoyang in
the Yellow River valley, which served
as the Zhou capital until the end of
the dynasty.
In fact, the political initiative had
passed from the Zhou kings to their
subordinates, and the royal court never
regained its authority. By the fifth century B.C.E., territorial princes ignored
the central government and used their
The Zhou dynasty saw a development of sword
resources to build, strengthen, and exdesign that resulted in longer, stronger, and
pand their states. They fought feromore lethal weapons. The iron swords depicted
ciously with one another in hopes of
here reflect the political instability and chronic
warfare of the late Zhou dynasty.
establishing themselves as leaders of

Weakening
of the Zhou

Iron Metallurgy

117

ben06937.Ch05_108-131.qxd

118

PART I |

7/27/07

7:58 AM

Page 118

The Early Complex Societies, 3500 to 500 B.C.E.

GOBI
D E S E RT

KO

Zha

A

Qi

Wei
Zho

Yel l ow
S ea

Lu
Song
Jia

Ha

Qin

RE

(H Yellow
ua n
g He)

Yan

Yangzi

ng

)

g

n

E ast
China
S ea

( Cha

Chu

Sou

th

C

hin

e
aS

a new political order. So violent were the last centuries of
the Zhou dynasty that they
are known as the Period of
the Warring States (403–221
B.C.E.). In 256 B.C.E. the
Zhou dynasty ended when
the last king abdicated his position under pressure from his
ambitious subordinate the
king of Qin. Only with the
establishment of the Qin dynasty in 221 B.C.E. did effective central government return
to China.

Society
and Family
in Ancient
China

a

In China, as in other parts
of the ancient world, the
introduction of agriculture
Map 5.2 China during the Period of the Warring States,
enabled individuals to accu403–221 B.C.E. Early Zhou rulers used iron tools and weapons to create a
mulate wealth and preserve
sizable kingdom. As knowledge of iron production spread, however, political
it within their families. Social
and military leaders were able to establish several regional states that
distinctions began to appear
competed for power and territory.
during neolithic times, and
after the establishment of the
Xia, Shang, and Zhou dynasties the distinctions became even sharper. Throughout
China the patriarchal family emerged as the institution that most directly influenced individuals’ lives and their roles in the larger society.
0

0

500 mi

250

500

1000 km

The Social Order
Ruling Elites

Already during the Xia dynasty, but especially under the Shang and the early Zhou, the
royal family and allied noble families occupied the most honored positions in Chinese
society. They resided in large, palatial compounds made of pounded earth, and they
lived on the agricultural surplus and taxes delivered by their subjects. Because of the
high cost of copper and tin, bronze implements were beyond the means of all but the
wealthy, so the conspicuous consumption of bronze by ruling elites clearly set them
apart from less privileged classes. Ruling elites possessed much of the bronze weaponry
that ensured military strength and political hegemony, and through their subordinates
and retainers they controlled most of the remaining bronze weapons available in northern China. They also supplied their households with cast-bronze utensils—pots, jars,
wine cups, plates, serving dishes, mirrors, bells, drums, and vessels used in ritual ceremonies—which were beyond the means of less privileged people. These utensils often
featured elaborate, detailed decorations that indicated remarkable skill on the part of

ben06937.Ch05_108-131.qxd

7/27/07

7:58 AM

Page 119

CHAPTER 5 |

Early Society in East Asia

the artisans who built the molds and
cast the metal. Expensive bronze
utensils bore steamed rice and rich
dishes of fish, pheasant, poultry, pork,
mutton, and rabbit to royal and aristocratic tables, whereas less privileged
classes relied on clay pots and consumed much simpler fare, such as vegetables and porridges made of millet,
wheat, or rice. Ruling elites consumed
bronze in staggering quantities: the
tomb of Marquis Yi of Zeng, a
provincial governor of the late Zhou
dynasty, contained a collection of
bronze weapons and decorative objects that weighed almost 11 tons.
A privileged class of hereditary
aristocrats rose from the military allies
of Shang and Zhou rulers. Aristocrats
possessed extensive land holdings,
and they worked at administrative and
military tasks. By Zhou times many of
them lived in cities where they obtained at least an elementary education, and their standard of living was
The delicate design of this bronze wine vessel
much more refined than that of the
displays the high level of craftsmanship during
commoners and slaves who worked
the late Shang dynasty.
their fields and served their needs.
Manuals of etiquette from Zhou times instructed the privileged classes in decorous behavior and outlined the proper way to carry out rituals. When dining in polite company,
for example, the cultivated aristocrat should show honor to the host and refrain from
gulping down food, swilling wine, making unpleasant noises, picking teeth at the table,
and playing with food by rolling it into a ball.
A small class of free artisans and craftsmen plied their trades in the cities of ancient
China. Some, who worked almost exclusively for the privileged classes, enjoyed a reasonably comfortable existence. During the Shang dynasty, for example, bronzesmiths
often lived in houses built of pounded earth. Although their dwellings were modest,
they were also sturdy and relatively expensive to build because of the amount of labor
required for pounded-earth construction. Jewelers, jade workers, embroiderers, and
manufacturers of silk textiles also benefited socially because of their importance to the
ruling elites.
There is little information about merchants and trade in ancient China until the
latter part of the Zhou dynasty, but archaeological discoveries show that longdistance trade routes reached China during Shang and probably Xia times as well. Despite the high mountain ranges and forbidding deserts that stood between China and
complex societies in India and southwest Asia, trade networks linked China with lands
to the west and south early in the third millennium B.C.E. Jade in Shang tombs came
from central Asia, and military technology involving horse-drawn chariots came
through central Asia from Mesopotamia. Shang bronzesmiths worked with tin that
came from the Malay peninsula in southeast Asia, and cowry shells came through
southeast Asia from Burma and the Maldive Islands in the Indian Ocean. The identity

119

Specialized Labor

Merchants and Trade

ben06937.Ch05_108-131.qxd

120

PART I |

7/27/07

7:58 AM

Page 120

The Early Complex Societies, 3500 to 500 B.C.E.

Sources from the Past
Peasants’ Protest
Peasants in ancient China mostly did not own land. Instead, they worked as tenants on plots allotted to them by royal or
aristocratic owners, who took sizable portions of the harvest. In the following poem from the Book of Songs, a collection
of verses dating from Zhou times, peasants liken their lords to rodents, protest the bite lords take from the peasants’
agricultural production, and threaten to abandon the lords’ lands for a neighboring state where conditions were better.
Large rats! Large rats!
Do not eat our millet.
Three years have we had to do with you.
And you have not been willing to show any regard for
us.
We will leave you,
And go to that happy land.
Happy land! Happy land!
There shall we find our place.
Large rats! Large rats!
Do not eat our wheat.
Three years have we had to do with you.
And you have not been willing to show any kindness
to us.
We will leave you,
And go to that happy state.
SOURCE:

Peasants

Happy state! Happy state!
There shall we find ourselves aright.
Large rats! Large rats!
Do not eat our springing grain!
Three years have we had to do with you,
And you have not been willing to think of
our toil.
We will leave you,
And go to those happy borders.
Happy borders! Happy borders!
Who will there make us always to groan?
FOR FURTHER REFLECTION

How might you go about judging the extent to which
these verses throw reliable light on class relations in ancient China?

James Legge, trans. The Chinese Classics, 5 vols. London: Henry Frowde, 1893, 4:171–72.

of the most important trade items that went from China to other lands is not clear,
but archaeologists have unearthed a few pieces of Shang pottery from Mohenjo-daro
and other Harappan sites.
Meanwhile, Chinese mariners began to probe nearby waters for profitable sea
routes. Legendary accounts credit King Yu, the supposed founder of the Xia dynasty,
with the invention of sails. There is no archaeological indication of Chinese sails before about 500 B.C.E., but there is abundant evidence that Chinese mariners used
large oar-propelled vessels before 2000 B.C.E. These watercraft supported fishing and
trade with offshore islands even before the emergence of the Xia dynasty. By the time
of the Shang dynasty, Chinese ships were traveling across the Yellow Sea to Korea.
During the Zhou dynasty, shipbuilding emerged as a prominent business all along
coastal China, and mariners had discovered how to navigate their vessels by the stars
and other heavenly bodies.
Back on the land, a large class of semiservile peasants populated the Chinese
countryside. They owned no land but provided agricultural, military, and labor services for their lords in exchange for plots to cultivate, security, and a portion of the harvest. They lived like their neolithic predecessors in small subterranean houses
excavated to a depth of about 1 meter (3 feet) and protected from the elements
by thatched walls and roofs. Women’s duties included mostly indoor activities such

ben06937.Ch05_108-131.qxd

7/27/07

7:58 AM

Page 121

CHAPTER 5 |

Early Society in East Asia

as wine making, weaving,
and cultivation of silkworms,
whereas men spent most of
their time outside working
in the fields, hunting, and
fishing.
Few effective tools were
available to cultivators until
the late Zhou dynasty. They
mostly relied on wooden
digging sticks and spades
with bone or stone tips,
which were strong enough
to cultivate the powdery
loess soil of northern China;
bronze tools were too exA wooden digging stick with two prongs was the
pensive for peasant cultivaagricultural tool most commonly used for cultivation
tors. Beginning about the
of loess soils in the Yellow River valley.
sixth century B.C.E., however, iron production increased dramatically in China, and iron plows, picks, spades, hoes, sickles, knives, and
rakes all came into daily use in the countryside.
There was also a sizable class of slaves, most of whom were enemy warriors captured during battles between the many competing states of ancient China. Slaves performed hard labor, such as the clearing of new fields or the building of city walls, that
required a large workforce. During the Shang dynasty, but rarely thereafter, hundreds
of slaves also figured among the victims sacrificed during funerary, religious, and other
ritual observances.

Slaves

Family and Patriarchy
Throughout human history the family has served as the principal institution for the
socialization of children and the preservation of cultural traditions. In China the extended family emerged as a particularly influential institution during neolithic times,
and it continued to play a prominent role in the shaping of both private and public
affairs after the appearance of the Xia, Shang, and Zhou states. Indeed, the early dynasties ruled their territories largely through family and kinship groups.
One reason for the pronounced influence of the Chinese family is the veneration of
ancestors, a practice with roots in neolithic times. In those early days agricultural peoples
in China diligently tended the graves and memories of their departed ancestors. They
believed that spirits of their ancestors passed into another realm of existence from which
they had the power to support and protect their surviving families if the descendants
displayed proper respect and ministered to the spirits’ needs. Survivors buried tools,
weapons, jewelry, and other material goods along with their dead. They also offered
sacrifices of food and drink at the graves of departed relatives. The strong sense of ancestors’ presence and continuing influence in the world led to an equally strong ethic
of family solidarity. A family could expect to prosper only if all its members—the dead
as well as the living—worked cooperatively toward common interests. The family became an institution linking departed generations to the living and even to those yet
unborn—an institution that wielded enormous influence over both the private and the
public lives of its members.

Veneration
of Ancestors

121

ben06937.Ch05_108-131.qxd

122

PART I |

7/27/07

7:58 AM

Page 122

The Early Complex Societies, 3500 to 500 B.C.E.

Sources from the Past
Family Solidarity in Ancient China
A poem from the Book of Songs illustrates clearly the importance of family connections in ancient China.
The flowers of the cherry tree—
Are they not gorgeously displayed?
Of all the men in the world
There are none equal to brothers.
On the dreaded occasions of death and burial,
It is brothers who greatly sympathize.
When fugitives are collected on the heights and low
grounds,
They are brothers who will seek one another out.
There is the wagtail on the level height—
When brothers are in urgent difficulties,
Friends, though they may be good
Will only heave long sighs.
Brothers may quarrel inside the walls [of their own
home],
But they will oppose insult from without,
When friends, however good they may be,
Will not afford help.
When death and disorder are past,
And there are tranquillity and rest,
SOURCE:

Although they have brothers,
Some reckon them not equal to friends.
Your dishes may be set in array,
And you may drink to satiety.
But it is when your brothers are all present
That you are harmonious and happy, with
child-like joy.
Loving union with wife and children
Is like the music of lutes.
But it is the accord of brothers
That makes the harmony and happiness lasting.
For the ordering of your family,
For the joy in your wife and children,
Examine this and study it—
Will you not find that it is truly so?
FOR FURTHER REFLECTION

To what extent does other archaeological and historical
evidence corroborate the views expressed in these verses
about the importance of family in ancient China?

James Legge, trans. The Chinese Classics, 5 vols. London: Henry Frowde, 1893, 4:250–53. (Translation slightly modified.)

Patriarchal Society

In the absence of organized religion or official priesthood in ancient China, the
patriarchal head of the family presided at rites and ceremonies honoring ancestors’
spirits. As mediator between the family’s living members and its departed relatives,
the family patriarch possessed tremendous authority. He officiated not only at ceremonies honoring ancestors of his household but also at memorials for collateral and
subordinate family branches that might include hundreds of individuals.
Chinese society vested authority principally in elderly males who headed their
households. Like its counterparts in other regions, Chinese society took on a strongly
patriarchal character—one that intensified with the emergence of large states. During
neolithic times Chinese men wielded public authority, but they won their rights to it
by virtue of the female line of their descent. Even if it did not vest power and authority
in women, this system provided solid reasons for a family to honor its female members.
As late as Shang times, two queens posthumously received the high honor of having
temples dedicated to their memories.
Women occasionally played prominent roles in public life during Shang times. Fu
Hao, for example, the consort of King Wu Ding whose tomb has thrown important
light on Shang royal society, ventured beyond the corridors of the Shang palace to play

ben06937.Ch05_108-131.qxd

7/27/07

7:58 AM

Page 123

CHAPTER 5 |

Early Society in East Asia

When burying their departed kin, survivors placed bronze ritual vessels
with food and drink in the tombs. In the tombs of wealthy individuals,
those vessels sometimes took elaborate shapes.

prominent roles in public life. Documents from her tomb indicate Fu Hao supervised
her estate and presided over sacrificial ceremonies that were usually the responsibility
of men who were heads of their households. She even served as general on several military campaigns and once led thirteen thousand troops in a successful operation against
a neighboring state.
During the later Shang and Zhou dynasties, however, women came to live increasingly in the shadow of men. Large states brought the military and political contributions of men into sharp focus. The ruling classes performed elaborate ceremonies
publicly honoring the spirits of departed ancestors, particularly males who had guided
their families and led especially notable lives. Gradually, the emphasis on men became
so intense that Chinese society lost its matrilineal character. After the Shang dynasty,
not even queens and empresses merited temples dedicated exclusively to their memories: at most, they had the honor of being remembered in association with their illustrious husbands.

Early Chinese Writing
and Cultural Development
Organized religion did not play as important a role in ancient China as it did in other
early societies. Early Chinese myths and legends explained the origins of the world, the
human race, agriculture, and the various arts and crafts. But Chinese thinkers saw no
need to organize those ideas into systematic religious traditions. They often spoke of
an impersonal heavenly power—tian (“heaven”), the agent responsible for bestowing

123

ben06937.Ch05_108-131.qxd

124

PART I |

7/27/07

7:58 AM

Page 124

The Early Complex Societies, 3500 to 500 B.C.E.

and removing the mandate of heaven on rulers—but they did not recognize a personal
supreme deity who intervened in human affairs or took special interest in human behavior. Nor did ancient China support a large class of priests like those of Mesopotamia,
Egypt, and India who mediated between human beings and the gods. A few priests
conducted ritual observances in honor of royal ancestors at royal courts, but for the
most part family patriarchs represented the interests of living generations to the spirits
of departed ancestors.
In that environment, then, writing served as the foundation for a distinctive secular cultural tradition in ancient China. Chinese scribes may have used written symbols to keep simple records during Xia times, but surviving evidence suggests that
writing came into extensive use only during the Shang dynasty. As in other lands,
writing in east Asia quickly became an indispensable tool of government as well as a
means of expressing ideas and offering reflections on human beings and their world.

Oracle Bones and Early Chinese Writing

Oracle Bones

In Mesopotamia and India merchants pioneered the use of writing. In China, however, the earliest known writing served the interests of rulers rather than traders. Writing in China goes back at least to the early part of the second millennium B.C.E.
Surviving records indicate that scribes at the Shang royal court kept written accounts
of important events on strips of bamboo or pieces of silk. Unfortunately, almost all
those materials have perished, along with their messages. Yet one medium employed
by ancient Chinese scribes has survived the ravages of time to prove beyond doubt that
writing figured prominently in the political life of the Shang dynasty. Recognized just
over a century ago, inscriptions on so-called oracle bones have thrown tremendous
light both on the Shang dynasty and on the early stages of Chinese writing.
Oracle bones were the principal instruments used by fortune-tellers in ancient
China. In other early societies, specialists forecast the future by examining the entrails
of sacrificed animals, divining the meaning of omens or celestial events such as eclipses,
studying the flight of birds, or interpreting weather patterns. In China, diviners used
specially prepared broad bones, such as the shoulder blades of sheep or turtle shells.
They inscribed a question on the bone and then subjected it to heat, either by placing
it into a fire or by scorching it with an extremely hot tool. When heated, the bone developed networks of splits and cracks. The fortune-teller then studied the patterns and
determined the answer to the question inscribed on the bone. Often the diviner
recorded the answer on the bone, and later scribes occasionally added further information about the events that actually came to pass.
During the nineteenth century C.E., peasants working in the fields around Anyang
discovered many oracle bones bearing inscriptions in archaic Chinese writing. They
did not recognize the writing, but they knew they had found an unusual and valuable
commodity. They called their finds “dragon bones” and sold them to druggists, who
ground them into powder that they resold as an especially potent medicine. Thus an
untold number of oracle bones went to the relief of aches, pains, and ills before scholars recognized their true nature. During the late 1890s dragon bones came to the attention of historians and literary scholars, who soon determined that the inscriptions
represented an early and previously unknown form of Chinese writing. Since then,
more than one hundred thousand oracle bones have come to light.
Most of the oracle bones have come from royal archives, and the questions posed
on them clearly reveal the day-to-day concerns of the Shang royal court. Will the season’s harvest be abundant or poor? Should the king attack his enemy or not? Will the
queen bear a son or a daughter? Would it please the royal ancestors to receive a sacrifice

ben06937.Ch05_108-131.qxd

7/27/07

7:58 AM

Page 125

CHAPTER 5 |

Early Society in East Asia

125

Oracle bone from Shang times with an inscribed question and cracks
caused by exposure of the bone to heat.

of animals—or perhaps of human slaves? Taken together, bits of information preserved
on the oracle bones have allowed historians to piece together an understanding of the
political and social order of Shang times.
Even more important, the oracle bones offer the earliest glimpse into the tradition
of Chinese writing. The earliest form of Chinese writing, like Sumerian and Egyptian
writing, was the pictograph—a conventional or stylized representation of an object. To
represent complex or abstract notions, the written language often combined various
pictographs into an ideograph. Thus, for example, the combined pictographs of a
mother and child mean “good” in written Chinese. Unlike most other languages, written Chinese did not include an alphabetic or phonetic component.
The characters used in contemporary Chinese writing are direct descendants of
those used in Shang times. Scholars have identified more than two thousand characters
inscribed on oracle bones, most of which have a modern counterpart. (Contemporary
Chinese writing regularly uses about five thousand characters, although thousands of
additional characters are also used for technical and specialized purposes.) Over the
centuries written Chinese characters have undergone considerable modification: generally speaking, they have become more stylized, conventional, and abstract. Yet the
affinities between Shang and later Chinese written characters are apparent at a glance.

Thought and Literature in Ancient China
The political interests of the Shang kings may have accounted for the origin of Chinese
writing, but once established, the technology was available for other uses. Because
Shang writing survives only on oracle bones and a small number of bronze inscriptions—all products that reflected the interests of the ruling elite that commissioned

Early Chinese Writing

ben06937.Ch05_108-131.qxd

126

PART I |

7/27/07

7:58 AM

Page 126

The Early Complex Societies, 3500 to 500 B.C.E.

them—evidence for the
expanded uses of writing
comes only from the Zhou
Oracle-bone script
dynasty and later times.
of the Shang dynasty
A few oracle bones
(16th century–
survive from Zhou times,
11th century B.C.E.)
along with a large number
of inscriptions on bronze
ceremonial utensils that
Zhou dynasty script
the ruling classes used
(11th century–
during rituals venerating
3rd century B.C.E.)
their ancestors. Apart from
those texts, the Zhou dynasty also produced books
Qin dynasty script
of poetry and history,
(221–207 B.C.E.)
manuals of divination and
ritual, and essays dealing
with moral, religious, philosophical, and political
Han dynasty script
(207 B.C.E.–220 C.E.)
themes. Best known of
these works are the reflections of Confucius and
other late Zhou thinkers
(discussed in chapter 8),
which served as the intelModern script
lectual foundation of clas(3rd century C.E.–present)
sical Chinese society. But
many other less famous
works show that Zhou
writers, mostly anonyContemporary script,
mous, were keen observPeople's Republic of China
ers of the world and subtle
(1950–the present)
commentators on human
affairs.
The evolution of Chinese characters from the Shang dynasty
Several writings of the
to the present.
Zhou dynasty won recognition as works of high
authority, and they exercised deep influence because they served as textbooks in Chinese schools. Among the most popular of these works in ancient times was the Book
of Changes, which was a manual instructing diviners in the art of foretelling the future. Zhou ruling elites also placed great emphasis on the Book of History, a collection
of documents that justified the Zhou state and called for subjects to obey their overlords. Zhou aristocrats learned the art of polite behavior and the proper way to conduct rituals from the Book of Etiquette, also known as the Book of Rites.
Most notable of the classic works, however, was the Book of Songs, also known as
the Book of Poetry and the Book of Odes, a collection of verses on themes both light and
serious. Though compiled and edited after 600 B.C.E., many of the 311 poems in the
collection date from a much earlier period and reflect conditions of the early Zhou
dynasty. Some of the poems had political implications because they recorded the illustrious deeds of heroic figures and ancient sage-kings, and others were hymns sung at
ritual observances. Yet many of them are charming verses about life, love, family,
Turtle

Zhou Literature

The Book of Songs

Horse

ben06937.Ch05_108-131.qxd

7/27/07

7:58 AM

Page 127

CHAPTER 5 |

Early Society in East Asia

127

friendship, eating, drinking, work, play, nature, and daily life that offer reflections on
human affairs without particular concern for political or social conditions. One poem,
for example, described a bride about to join the household of her husband:
The peach tree is young and elegant;
Brilliant are its flowers.
This young lady is going to her future home,
And will order well her chamber and house.
The peach tree is young and elegant;
Abundant will be its fruit.
This young lady is going to her future home,
And will order well her house and chamber.
The peach tree is young and elegant;
Luxuriant are its leaves.
This young lady is going to her future home,
And will order well her family.

The Book of Songs and other writings of the Zhou dynasty offer only a small sample
of China’s earliest literary tradition, for most Zhou writings have perished. Those written on delicate bamboo strips and silk fabrics have deteriorated: records indicate that
the tomb of one Zhou king contained hundreds of books written on bamboo strips,
but none of them survive. Other books fell victim to human enemies. When the imperial house of Qin ended the chaos of the Period of the Warring States and brought all
of China under tightly centralized rule in 221 B.C.E., the victorious emperor ordered
the destruction of all writings that did not have some immediate utilitarian value. He
spared works on divination, agriculture, and medicine, but he condemned those on
poetry, history, and philosophy, which he feared might inspire doubts about his government or encourage an independence of mind. Only a few items escaped, hidden
away for a decade or more until scholars and writers could once again work without
fear of persecution. These few survivors represent the earliest development of Chinese
literature and moral thought.

Destruction of Early
Chinese Literature

Ancient China and the Larger World
High mountain ranges, forbidding deserts, and turbulent seas stood between China
and other early societies of the eastern hemisphere. These geographic features did not
entirely prevent communication between China and other lands, but they hindered the
establishment of direct long-distance trade relations such as those linking Mesopotamia
with Harappan India or those between the Phoenicians and other peoples of the
Mediterranean basin. Nevertheless, like other early societies, ancient China developed
in the context of a larger world of interaction and exchange. Trade, migration, and the
expansion of Chinese agricultural society all ensured that peoples of the various east
Asian and central Asian societies would have regular dealings with one another. Chinese cultivators had particularly intense relations—sometimes friendly and sometimes
hostile—with their neighbors to the north, the west, and the south.

Chinese Cultivators and Nomadic Peoples of Central Asia
From the valley of the Yellow River, Chinese agriculture spread to the north and west.
The dry environment of the steppes limited expansion in these directions, however,
since harvests progressively diminished to the point that agriculture became impractical.

Qin (chihn)

ben06937.Ch05_108-131.qxd

128

PART I |

Steppe Nomads

Nomadic Society

7/27/07

7:58 AM

Page 128

The Early Complex Societies, 3500 to 500 B.C.E.

During the Zhou dynasty, the zone of agriculture extended about 300 kilometers (186
miles) west of Xi’an, to the eastern region of modern Gansu province.
As they expanded to the north and west, Chinese cultivators encountered nomadic
peoples who had built pastoral societies in the grassy steppe lands of central Asia.
These lands were too arid to sustain large agricultural societies, but their grasses supported large herds of horses, cattle, sheep, goats, and yaks. After Indo-European peoples in the western steppes began to ride domesticated horses, about 4000 B.C.E., they
were able to herd their other animals more effectively and push deeper into the
steppes. By 2900 B.C.E., after learning the techniques of bronze metallurgy, they had
introduced heavy wagons into the steppes, and by 2200 B.C.E. their wagons were
increasingly prominent in the steppe lands east of the Ural Mountains. After about
1000 B.C.E. several clusters of nomadic peoples organized powerful herding societies
on the Eurasian steppes.
Nomadic peoples did little farming, since the arid steppe did not reward efforts at
cultivation. Instead, the nomads concentrated on herding their animals, driving them
to regions where they could find food and water. The herds provided meat and milk as
well as skins and bones from which the nomads fashioned clothes and tools. Because
nomadic peoples ranged widely over the grassy steppes of central Asia, they served as
links between agricultural societies to the east and west. They were prominent intermediaries in trade networks spanning central Asia. They also brought knowledge of
bronze metallurgy and horse-drawn chariots from southwest Asia. Nomadic peoples
depended on agricultural societies for grains and finished products, such as textiles and
metal goods, which they could not readily produce for themselves. In exchange for
these products, they offered horses, which flourished on the steppes, and their services
as links to other societies.
Despite this somewhat symbiotic arrangement, Chinese and nomadic peoples always had tense relations. Indeed, they often engaged in bitter wars, since the relatively poor but hardy nomads frequently fell upon the rich agricultural society at
their doorstep and sought to seize its wealth. At least from the time of the Shang dynasty, and probably from the Xia as well, nomadic raids posed a constant threat to
the northern and western regions of China. The Zhou state grew strong enough to
overcome the Shang partly because Zhou military forces honed their skills waging
campaigns against nomadic peoples to the west. Later, however, the Zhou state almost crumbled under the pressure of nomadic incursions compounded by disaffection among Zhou allies and subordinates.
Nomadic peoples did not imitate Chinese ways. The environment of the steppe
prevented them from cultivating crops, and the need to herd their animals made it
impossible for them to settle permanently in towns or to build cities. Nomadic peoples
did not adopt Chinese political or social traditions but, rather, organized themselves
into clans under the leadership of charismatic warrior-chiefs. Nor did they use writing until about the seventh century C.E. Yet pastoral nomadism was an economic and
social adaptation to agricultural society: the grains and manufactured goods available
from agricultural lands enabled nomadic peoples to take advantage of the steppe environment by herding animals.

The Southern Expansion of Chinese Society
The Yangzi Valley

Chinese influence spread to the south as well as to the north and west. There was no
immediate barrier to cultivation in the south: indeed, the valley of the Yangzi River
supports even more intensive agriculture than is possible in the Yellow River basin.
Known in China as the Chang Jiang (“Long River”), the Yangzi carries enormous

ben06937.Ch05_108-131.qxd

7/27/07

7:58 AM

Page 129

CHAPTER 5 |

Early Society in East Asia

129

Terraced rice paddies in the river
valleys of southern China have long
produced abundant harvests.

volumes of water 6,300 kilometers (3,915 miles) from its headwaters in the lofty
Qinghai mountains of Tibet to its mouth near the modern Chinese cities of Nanjing
and Shanghai, where it empties into the East China Sea. The moist, subtropical climate of southern China lent itself readily to the cultivation of rice: ancient cultivators
sometimes raised two crops of rice per year.
There was no need for King Yu to tame the Yangzi River, which does not bring
devastating floods like those of the Yellow River. But intensive cultivation of rice depended on the construction and maintenance of an elaborate irrigation system that
allowed cultivators to flood their paddies and release the waters at the appropriate
time. The Shang and Zhou states provided sources of authority that could supervise
a complex irrigation system, and harvests in southern China increased rapidly during
the second and first millennia B.C.E. The populations of cultivators’ communities
surged along with their harvests.
As their counterparts did in lands to the north and west of the Yellow River valley, the indigenous peoples of southern China responded in two ways to the increasing prominence of agriculture in the Yangzi River valley. Many became cultivators
themselves and joined Chinese agricultural society. Others continued to live by hunting and gathering: some moved into the hills and mountains, where conditions did

ben06937.Ch05_108-131.qxd

130

PART I |

7/27/07

7:58 AM

Page 130

The Early Complex Societies, 3500 to 500 B.C.E.

The State of Chu

not favor agriculture, and others migrated to Taiwan or southeast Asian lands such as
Vietnam and Thailand, where agriculture was less common.
Agricultural surpluses and growing populations led to the emergence of cities,
states, and complex societies in the Yangzi as well as the Yellow River valley. During
the late Zhou dynasty, the powerful state of Chu, situated in the central region of
the Yangzi, governed its affairs autonomously and challenged the Zhou for supremacy. By the end of the Zhou dynasty, Chu and other states in southern China
were in regular communication with their counterparts in the Yellow River valley.
They adopted Chinese political and social traditions as well as Chinese writing, and
they built societies closely resembling those of the Yellow River valley. Although only
the northern portions of the Yangzi River valley fell under the authority of the Shang
and Zhou states, by the end of the Zhou dynasty all of southern China formed part
of an emerging larger Chinese society.

A

gricultural peoples in east Asia built complex societies that in broad outline were
much like those to the west. Particularly in the valleys of the Yellow River and the

Yangzi River, early Chinese cultivators organized powerful states, developed social distinctions, and established sophisticated cultural traditions. Their language, writing, beliefs, and values differed considerably from those of their contemporaries in other
societies, and these cultural elements lent a distinctiveness to Chinese society. In spite of
formidable geographic obstacles in the form of deserts, mountain ranges, and extensive
bodies of water, inhabitants of ancient China managed to trade and communicate with
peoples of other societies. As a result, wheat cultivation, bronze and iron metallurgy,
horse-drawn chariots, and wheeled vehicles all made their way from southwest Asia to
China in ancient times. Thus in east Asia as in other parts of the eastern hemisphere, agriculture demonstrated its potential to provide a foundation for large-scale social organization and to support interaction and exchange between peoples of different societies.

C H R O N O LO GY
5000–3000 B.C.E.

Yangshao society

2200–1766 B.C.E.

Xia dynasty

1766–1122 B.C.E.

Shang dynasty

1122–256 B.C.E.

Zhou dynasty

403–221 B.C.E.

Period of the Warring States

ben06937.Ch05_108-131.qxd

7/27/07

7:58 AM

Page 131

CHAPTER 5 |

F O R

F U R T H E R

Early Society in East Asia

131

R E A D I N G

Cyril Birch, ed. Anthology of Chinese Literature. 2 vols. New York,
1965. Collection of literary sources in translation.
Kwang-chih Chang. The Archaeology of Ancient China. 4th ed.
New Haven, 1986. Brings the results of archaeological excavations to bear on ancient Chinese history.
———. Early Chinese Civilization: Anthropological Perspectives. Cambridge, Mass., 1976. Essays by a distinguished archaeologist.
———. Shang Civilization. New Haven, 1980. Based on archaeological research.
Nicola di Cosmo. Ancient China and Its Enemies: The Rise of
Nomadic Power in East Asian History. Cambridge, 2002. An
insightful study analyzing the emergence of pastoral nomadism
and relations between Chinese cultivators and nomadic peoples in ancient times.
Jacques Gernet. Ancient China from the Beginnings to the Empire.
Trans. by R. Rudorff. London, 1968. A brief popular survey
of early Chinese society.
Cho-yun Hsu. Ancient China in Transition: An Analysis of Social
Mobility, 722–222 B.C. Stanford, 1965. A scholarly examination of social change during the later Zhou dynasty.
——— and Katheryn M. Linduff. Western Chou Civilization. New
Haven, 1988. Draws on both literary sources and archaeological discoveries in offering a comprehensive study of the
early Zhou dynasty.
David N. Keightley, ed. The Origins of Chinese Civilization.
Berkeley, 1983. An important collection of scholarly articles
dealing with all aspects of early Chinese society.

Owen Lattimore. Inner Asian Frontiers of China. 2nd ed. New
York, 1951. Fascinating analysis of the relationship between
Chinese and nomadic peoples of central Asia by a geographer
who traveled through much of central Asia in the early twentieth century.
Michael Loewe and Edward L. Shaughnessy, eds. The Cambridge
History of Ancient China: From the Origins of Civilization to
221 B.C. Cambridge, 1999. Presents fourteen detailed essays
by leading scholars.
Victor H. Mair, Nancy S. Steinhardt, and Paul R. Goldin, eds.
Hawai`i Reader in Traditional Chinese Culture. Honolulu,
2005. An imaginative selection of primary sources in English
translation.
Jessica Rawson. Ancient China: Art and Archaeology. New York,
1980. An outstanding and well-illustrated volume with especially strong treatment of archaeological discoveries.
Robert L. Thorp. China in the Early Bronze Age: Shang Civilization. Philadelphia, 2006. Authoritative synthesis of archaeological studies that places the Shang dynasty in its historical
context.
William Watson. Early Civilization in China. New York, 1966.
Well-illustrated popular account dealing with the period from
prehistoric times to the Zhou dynasty.


