Americas & Oceania

Early Societies of Mesoamerica

Early Societies of Oceania

The Olmecs
Heirs of the Olmecs: The Maya
Maya Society and Religion
Heirs of the Olmecs: Teotihuacan

Early Societies in Australia and New Guinea
The Peopling of the Pacific Islands

Early Societies of South America
Early Andean Society and the Chavín Cult
Early Andean States: Mochica

In early September of the year 683 C.E., a Maya man named Chan Bahlum grasped a sharp
obsidian knife and cut three deep slits into the skin of his penis. He inserted into each slit a
strip of paper made from beaten tree bark so as to encourage a continuing flow of blood. His
younger brother Kan Xul performed a similar rite, while other members of his family also
drew blood from their bodies.
The bloodletting observances of September 683 C.E. were political and religious rituals,
acts of deep piety performed as Chan Bahlum presided over funeral services for his recently
deceased father, Pacal, king of the Maya city of Palenque in the Yucatan peninsula. The Maya
believed that the shedding of royal blood was essential to the world’s survival. Thus, as Chan
Bahlum prepared to succeed his father as king of Palenque, he let his blood flow copiously.
Throughout Mesoamerica, Maya and other peoples performed similar rituals for a millennium and more. Maya rulers and their family members regularly spilled their blood by opening wounds with obsidian knives, stingray spines, or sharpened bones. Men commonly drew
blood from the penis, like Chan Bahlum, and women often drew from the tongue. Both sexes
occasionally drew blood also from the earlobes, lips, or cheeks, and they sometimes
increased the flow by pulling long, thick cords through their wounds.
This shedding of blood was so crucial to Maya rituals because of its association with rain
and agriculture. According to Maya priests, the gods had shed their blood to water the earth
and nourish crops of maize, and they expected human beings to honor them by imitating
their sacrifice. By spilling human blood the Maya hoped to please the gods and ensure that
life-giving waters would bring bountiful harvests to their fields. By inflicting painful wounds
not just on their enemies but on their own bodies as well, the Maya demonstrated their conviction that bloodletting rituals were essential to the coming of rain and the survival of their
agricultural society.
This agricultural society was the product of a distinctive tradition. Human groups migrated
to the Americas and Oceania long after they had established communities throughout most of
the eastern hemisphere, but long before any people began to experiment with agriculture.
Their migrations took place during ice ages when glaciers locked up much of the earth’s water,
causing sea levels all over the world to decline precipitously—sometimes by as much as
300 meters (984 feet). For thousands of years, temporary land bridges joined regions that both
before and after the ice ages were separated by the seas. One land bridge linked Siberia with
Alaska. Another joined the continent of Australia to the island of New Guinea. Low sea levels
also exposed large stretches of land that connected Sumatra, Java, and other Indonesian islands to the peninsula of southeast Asia. Human groups took advantage of those bridges by
OPPOSITE:

In this wall painting from a Maya temple, dignitaries converse among themselves
during a ceremony.

133

ben06937.Ch06_132-155.qxd

134

PART I |

7/27/07

8:04 AM

Page 134

The Early Complex Societies, 3500 to 500 B.C.E.
migrating to new lands. Their movements represented continuations of the migratory flows
that earlier had resulted in the establishment of human communities throughout the eastern
hemisphere.
When the earth’s temperature rose and the glaciers melted, beginning about eighteen
thousand years ago, the waters returned and flooded low-lying lands around the world. Eventually, the seas once again divided Asia from America by the body of water known as the
Bering Strait, and they also separated Australia, New Guinea, and the islands of Indonesia. By
that time, however, human communities had become well established in the Americas, the
islands of southeast Asia, and Australia, where they independently built distinctive societies.
The return of high waters did not put an end to human migrations. Human groups fanned
out from Alaska and ventured to all corners of North America, Central America, and South
America. Beginning about 3000 B.C.E. coastal peoples of southeast Asia built large sailing canoes and established human settlements in the previously uninhabited islands of the Pacific
Ocean. By about 700 C.E. human beings had established communities in almost every habitable part of the world.
High sea levels did not prevent human groups from migrating to new lands, but they
sometimes made it difficult for peoples to maintain ties with others separated by large bodies
of water. By no means did human migrants to the Americas and Oceania lead completely
isolated lives. To the contrary, there were frequent and sometimes regular interactions between peoples of different societies within the Americas and within Oceania. Moreover, there
were sporadic but significant contacts between Asian peoples and Pacific islanders and also
between Pacific islanders and native peoples of the Americas. It is likely that at least fleeting
encounters took place as well between peoples of the eastern and western hemispheres, although little evidence survives on the nature of encounters in early times. Yet even as they
dealt frequently with peoples of other societies, the first inhabitants of the Americas and
Oceania established distinctive societies of their own, as did their counterparts in the eastern
hemisphere.
Indeed, despite their different origins and their distinctive political, social, and cultural traditions, peoples of the Americas and Oceania built societies that in some ways resembled
those of the eastern hemisphere. Human communities independently discovered agriculture
in several regions of North America and South America, and migrants introduced cultivation
to the inhabited Pacific islands as well. With agriculture came increasing populations, settlement in towns, specialized labor, formal political authorities, hierarchical social orders, longdistance trade, and organized religious traditions. The Americas also generated large, densely
populated societies featuring cities, monumental public works, imperial states, and sometimes traditions of writing as well. Thus, like their counterparts in the eastern hemisphere, the
earliest societies of the Americas and Oceania reflected a common human tendency toward
the development of increasingly complex social forms.

Early Societies of Mesoamerica
Much is unclear about the early population of the Americas by human communities.
The first large wave of migration from Siberia to Alaska probably took place about
13,000 B.C.E. But small numbers of migrants may have crossed the Bering land bridge
earlier, and it is also possible that some migrants reached the western hemisphere by
watercraft, sailing or drifting with the currents from northeast Asia down the west
coast of North America. In the view of some scholars, it is also quite possible that
some migrants crossed the Atlantic Ocean and established communities on the eastern coast of North America. Several archaeological excavations at widely scattered
sites in both North America and South America have yielded remains that scholars

ben06937.Ch06_132-155.qxd

7/27/07

8:04 AM

Page 135

CHAPTER 6 |

Early Societies in the Americas and Oceania

135

date to 15,000 B.C.E. or earlier, suggesting that at least a few human groups made
their way to the Americas before the beginning of large-scale migration from Siberia.
In any case, after 13,000 B.C.E. migrants arrived in large numbers, and they quickly
populated all habitable regions of the western hemisphere. By 9500 B.C.E. they had
reached the southernmost part of South America, more than 17,000 kilometers
(10,566 miles) from the Bering land bridge.
The earliest human inhabitants of the Americas lived exclusively by hunting and
gathering. Beginning about 8,000 B.C.E., however, it became increasingly difficult for
them to survive by foraging. Large game animals became scarce, partly because they
did not adapt well to the rapidly warming climate and partly because of overhunting
by expanding human communities. By 7500 B.C.E. many species of large animals in
the Americas were well on the road to extinction. Some human communities relied
on fish and small game to supplement foods that they gathered. Others turned to
agriculture, and they gave rise to the first complex societies in the Americas.

The Olmecs
By 8000 to 7000 B.C.E. the peoples of Mesoamerica—the region from the central portion of modern Mexico to Honduras and El Salvador—had begun to experiment with
the cultivation of beans, chili peppers, avocados, squashes, and gourds. By 4000 B.C.E.
they had discovered the agricultural potential of maize, which soon became the staple
food of the region. Later they added tomatoes to the crops they cultivated. Agricultural villages appeared soon after 3000 B.C.E., and by 2000 B.C.E. agriculture had spread
throughout Mesoamerica.
Early Mesoamerican peoples had a diet rich in cultivated foods, but they did not
keep as many animals as their counterparts in the eastern hemisphere. Their domesticated animals included turkeys and small, barkless dogs, both of which they consumed
as food. But most large animals of the western hemisphere were not susceptible to
domestication, so Mesoamericans were unable to harness animal energy. Human laborers prepared fields for cultivation, and human porters carried trade goods on their
backs. Mesoamericans had no need for wheeled vehicles, which would have been useful only if draft animals were available to pull them.
Toward the end of the second millennium B.C.E., the tempo of Mesoamerican life
quickened as elaborate ceremonial centers with monumental pyramids, temples, and
palaces arose alongside the agricultural villages. The first of these centers were not
cities like those of early societies in the eastern hemisphere. Permanent residents of
the ceremonial centers included members of the ruling elite, priests, and a few artisans
and craftsmen who tended to the needs of the ruling and priestly classes. Large numbers of people gathered in the ceremonial centers on special occasions to observe rituals or on market days to exchange goods, but most people then returned to their
homes in neighboring villages and hamlets.
Agricultural villages and ceremonial centers arose in several regions of Mesoamerica. The earliest known and the most thoroughly studied of them appeared on the
coast of the Gulf of Mexico, near the modern Mexican city of Veracruz, which
emerged as the nerve center for Olmec society. Historians and archaeologists have
systematically studied Olmec society only since the 1940s, and many questions about
the Olmecs remain unanswered. Even their proper name is unknown: the term Olmec
(meaning “rubber people”) did not come from the ancient people themselves, but
derives instead from the rubber trees that flourish in the region they inhabited. Nevertheless, some of the basic features of Olmec society have become reasonably clear, and
it is certain that Olmec cultural traditions influenced all complex societies of Mesoamerica until the arrival of European peoples in the sixteenth century C.E.

Early Agriculture
in Mesoamerica

Ceremonial Centers

Olmecs: The
“Rubber People”

ben06937.Ch06_132-155.qxd

136

PART I |

7/27/07

8:04 AM

Page 136

The Early Complex Societies, 3500 to 500 B.C.E.

Gulf of
Mexico
Chichén Itzá
Lake Texcoco

Teotihuacan

Yucatan
Peninsula

Tres Zapotes

La Venta
San Lorenzo

PA C I

FIC

OC

EA

Palenque
Tikal

Kaminaljuyu

N

Caribbean
Sea

Maya
Olmec
Zone of Teotihuacan influence
0
0

500

250
500

Map 6.1 Early Mesoamerican societies, 1200
B.C.E.–1100 C.E. Describe the
different geographical settings
of the early Mesoamerican
societies represented here.
Consider the extent to which
geographical and environmental conditions influenced
the historical development and
daily life of these societies.

Olmec Society

Trade in Jade
and Obsidian

1000 mi
1000

1500 km

The first Olmec ceremonial center arose about 1200 B.C.E. on the site of the modern town of San Lorenzo, and it served as their capital for some four hundred years.
When the influence of San Lorenzo waned, leadership passed to new ceremonial
centers at La Venta (800–400 B.C.E.) and Tres Zapotes (400–100 B.C.E.). These sites
defined the heartland of Olmec society, where agriculture produced rich harvests. The
entire region receives abundant rainfall, so there was no need to build extensive systems of irrigation. Like the Harappans, however, the Olmecs constructed elaborate
drainage systems to divert waters that otherwise might have flooded their fields or
destroyed their settlements. Some Olmec drainage construction remains visible and
effective today.
Olmec society was probably authoritarian in nature. Untold thousands of laborers
participated in the construction of the ceremonial centers at San Lorenzo, La Venta,
and Tres Zapotes. Each of the principal Olmec sites featured an elaborate complex of
temples, pyramids, altars, stone sculptures, and tombs for rulers. Common subjects delivered a portion of their harvests for the maintenance of the elite classes living in the
ceremonial centers and provided labor for the various large-scale construction projects.
Indeed, common subjects labored regularly on behalf of the Olmec elite—not only
in building drainage systems and ceremonial centers but also in providing appropriate
artistic adornment for the capitals. The most distinctive artistic creations of the Olmecs
were colossal human heads—possibly likenesses of rulers—sculpted from basalt rock.
The largest of these sculptures stands 3 meters (almost 10 feet) tall and weighs some
20 tons. In the absence of draft animals and wheels, human laborers dragged enormous boulders from quarries, floated them on rafts to points near their destinations,
dragged them to their intended sites, and then positioned them for the sculptors. The
largest sculptures required the services of about one thousand laborers. Apart from the
colossal heads, the Olmec capitals featured many other large stone sculptures and monumental buildings that required the services of laborers by the hundreds and thousands. Construction of the huge pyramid at La Venta, for example, required some eight
hundred thousand man-days of labor.
Olmec influence extended to much of the central and southern regions of modern
Mexico and beyond that to modern Guatemala and El Salvador. The Olmecs spread

ben06937.Ch06_132-155.qxd

7/27/07

8:04 AM

Page 137

CHAPTER 6 |

Early Societies in the Americas and Oceania

their influence partly by military force,
but trade was a prominent link between the Olmec heartland and the
other regions of Mesoamerica. The
Olmecs produced large numbers of
decorative objects from jade, which
they had to import. In the absence of
any metal technology, they also made
extensive use of obsidian from which
they fashioned knives and axes with
wickedly sharp cutting edges. Like
jade, obsidian came to the Gulf coast
from distant regions in the interior of
Mesoamerica. In exchange for the imports, the Olmecs traded small works
of art fashioned from jade, basalt, or
ceramics and perhaps also local products such as animal skins.
Among the many mysteries surrounding the Olmecs, one of the
most perplexing concerns the decline
and fall of their society. The Olmecs
systematically destroyed their ceremonial centers at both San Lorenzo
and La Venta and then deserted the
sites. Archaeologists studying these
sites found statues broken and buried,
monuments defaced, and the capitals
themselves burned. Although intruders may have ravaged the ceremonial
centers, many scholars believe that the
Olmecs deliberately destroyed their
capitals, perhaps because of civil conflicts or doubts about the effectiveness and legitimacy of the ruling
classes. In any case, by about 400 B.C.E.
Olmec society had fallen on hard
times, and soon thereafter societies in
other parts of Mesoamerica eclipsed
it altogether.
Yet later Mesoamerican societies adopted several Olmec traditions. They cultivated
maize, built ceremonial centers with temple pyramids, and maintained a calendar based
on one inherited from Olmec priests. They also borrowed Olmec ball games and rituals involving human sacrifice. Because the Olmecs left no written records beyond calendrical inscriptions, however, the exact roles that ball games and human sacrifices
played in their society are not clear.

Heirs of the Olmecs: The Maya
During the thousand years following the Olmecs’ disappearance about 100 B.C.E.,
complex societies arose in several Mesoamerican regions. Human population grew dramatically, and ceremonial centers cropped up at sites far removed from the Olmec

137

Colossal Olmec head
carved from basalt
rock between 1000
and 600 B.C.E. and
discovered at La
Venta. Olmecs carved
similar heads for their
ceremonial centers at
San Lorenzo and Tres
Zapotes.

Olmec ceremonial axe
head carved from
jade about 800 to 400
B.C.E. Jaguar features,
such as those depicted
here, are prominent in
Olmec art.

ben06937.Ch06_132-155.qxd

138

PART I |

7/27/07

8:04 AM

Page 138

The Early Complex Societies, 3500 to 500 B.C.E.

The Maya

Tikal

Maya Warfare
Teotihuacan (tay-uh-teewah-KAHN)

heartland. Some of them evolved into genuine cities: they attracted large populations
of permanent residents, embarked on ambitious programs of construction, maintained
large markets, and encouraged increasing specialization of labor. Networks of long-distance trade linked the new urban centers and extended their influence to all parts of
Mesoamerica. Within the cities themselves, priests devised written languages and compiled a body of astronomical knowledge. In short, Mesoamerican societies developed
in a manner roughly parallel to their counterparts in the eastern hemisphere.
The earliest heirs of the Olmecs were the Maya, who created a remarkable society in
the region now occupied by southern Mexico, Guatemala, Belize, Honduras, and El
Salvador. The highlands of Guatemala offer fertile soil and excellent conditions for agriculture. Permanent villages began to appear there during the third century B.C.E. The
most prominent of them was Kaminaljuyú, located on the site of modern Guatemala
City. Like the Olmec capitals, Kaminaljuyú was a ceremonial center rather than a true
city, but it dominated the life of other communities in the region. Some twelve thousand to fifteen thousand laborers worked to build its temples, and its products traveled
the trade routes as far as central Mexico. During the fourth century C.E., Kaminaljuyú
fell under the economic and perhaps also the political dominance of the much larger
city of Teotihuacan in central Mexico and lost much of its influence in Maya society.
After the fourth century, Maya society flourished mostly in the poorly drained
Mesoamerican lowlands, where thin, tropical soils quickly lost their fertility. To enhance
the agricultural potential of the region, the Maya built terraces designed to trap silt carried by the numerous rivers passing through the lowlands. By artificially retaining rich
earth, they dramatically increased the agricultural productivity of their lands. They harvested maize in abundance, and they also cultivated cotton from which they wove fine
textiles highly prized both in their own society and by trading partners in other parts of
Mesoamerica. Maya cultivators also raised cacao, the large bean that is the source of
chocolate. Cacao was a precious commodity consumed mostly by nobles in Maya society. They whisked powdered cacao into water to create a stimulating beverage, and they
sometimes even ate the bitter cacao beans as snacks. The product was so valuable that
Maya used cacao beans as money.
From about 300 to 900 C.E., the Maya built more than eighty large ceremonial centers in the lowlands—all with pyramids, palaces, and temples—as well as numerous
smaller settlements. Some of the larger centers attracted dense populations and evolved
into genuine cities. Foremost among them was Tikal, the most important Maya political
center between the fourth and the ninth centuries C.E. At its height, roughly 600 to 800
C.E., Tikal was a wealthy and bustling city with a population approaching forty thousand.
It boasted enormous paved plazas and scores of temples, pyramids, palaces, and public
buildings. The Temple of the Giant Jaguar, a stepped pyramid rising sharply to a height
of 47 meters (154 feet), dominated the skyline and represented Tikal’s control over the
surrounding region, which had a population of about five hundred thousand.
The Maya organized themselves politically into scores of small city-kingdoms. Tikal
was probably the largest, but Palenque and Chichén Itzá also were sizable states. The
smaller kingdoms had populations between ten thousand and thirty thousand. Maya
kings often bore menacing names such as Curl Snout, Smoking Frog, and Stormy Sky.
Especially popular were names associated with the jaguar, the most dangerous predator
of the Mesoamerican forests. Prominent Maya kings included Great Jaguar Paw, Shield
Jaguar, Bird Jaguar, and Jaguar Penis (meaning the progenitor of other jaguar-kings).
Dazzled by Maya architecture and sculpture, scholars of earlier generations
thought these kingdoms were peaceful states that promoted artistic and scientific endeavors. Since the 1970s, however, historians and archaeologists have deciphered
thousands of previously unreadable inscriptions that have dramatically transformed

ben06937.Ch06_132-155.qxd

7/27/07

8:04 AM

Page 139

CHAPTER 6 |

Early Societies in the Americas and Oceania

understanding of Maya politics.
Combined with fresh archaeological discoveries, these sources make
it clear that the Maya kingdoms
fought constantly with one another. Victors generally destroyed
the peoples they defeated and took
over their ceremonial centers, but
the purpose of Maya warfare was
not so much to kill enemies as to
capture them in hand-to-hand combat on the battlefield. Warriors won
enormous prestige when they
brought back important captives
from neighboring kingdoms. They
stripped captives of their fine dress
and symbols of rank, and sometimes they kept high-ranking captives alive for years, displaying
them as trophies. Ultimately, however, most captives ended their lives
either as slaves or as sacrificial victims to Maya gods. High-ranking
captives in particular often underwent ritual torture and sacrifice in
public ceremonies on important
occasions.
Bitter conflicts between small
kingdoms were sources of constant tension in Maya society. Only about the ninth
century C.E. did the state of Chichén Itzá in the northern Yucatan peninsula seek to
dampen hostile instincts and establish a larger political framework for Maya society.
The rulers of Chichén Itzá preferred to absorb captives and integrate them into their
own society rather than annihilate them or offer them up as sacrificial victims. Some
captives refused the opportunity and went to their deaths as proud warriors, but
many agreed to recognize the authority of Chichén Itzá and participate in the construction of a larger society. Between the ninth and eleventh centuries C.E., Chichén
Itzá organized a loose empire that brought a measure of political stability to the
northern Yucatan.
By about 800 C.E., however, most Maya populations had begun to desert their cities.
Within a century Maya society was in full decline everywhere except the northern Yucatan, where Chichén Itzá continued to flourish. Historians have suggested many possible causes of the decline, including invasion by foreigners from Mexico, internal
dissension and civil war, failure of the system of water control leading to diminished
harvests and demographic collapse, ecological problems caused by destruction of the
forests, the spread of epidemic diseases, and natural catastrophes such as earthquakes.
Possibly several problems combined to destroy Maya society. It is likely that debilitating
civil conflict and excessive siltation of agricultural terraces caused particularly difficult
problems for the Maya. In any case the population declined, the people abandoned
their cities, and long-distance trade with central Mexico came to a halt. Meanwhile, the
tropical jungles of the lowlands encroached upon human settlements and gradually
smothered the cities, temples, pyramids, and monuments of a once-vibrant society.

139

Temple of the Giant
Jaguar at Tikal, which
served as funerary
pyramid for Lord
Cacao, a prominent
Maya ruler of the
late sixth and early
seventh centuries C.E.

Chichén Itzá

Maya Decline

ben06937.Ch06_132-155.qxd

140

PART I |

7/27/07

8:04 AM

Page 140

The Early Complex Societies, 3500 to 500 B.C.E.

A vivid mural from a
temple in the small
Maya kingdom of
Bonampak (in the
southern part of
modern Mexico)
depicts warriors
raiding a neighboring
village to capture
prisoners who will
become sacrificial
victims.

Maya Society and Religion
Apart from the kings and ruling families, Maya society included a large class of priests
who maintained an elaborate calendar and transmitted knowledge of writing, astronomy,
and mathematics. A hereditary nobility owned most land and cooperated with the kings
and priests by organizing military forces and participating in religious rituals. Maya merchants came from the ruling and noble classes. Their travels had strong political overtones, since they served not only as traders but also as ambassadors to neighboring lands
and allied peoples. Moreover, they traded mostly in exotic and luxury goods, such as rare
animal skins, cacao beans, and finely crafted works of art, which rulers coveted as signs of
special status. Apart from the ruling and priestly elites, Maya society generated several
other distinct social classes. Professional architects and sculptors oversaw construction of
large monuments and public buildings. Artisans specialized in the production of pottery,
tools, and cotton textiles. Large classes of peasants and slaves fed the entire society and
provided physical labor for the construction of cities and monuments.
The Maya built upon the cultural achievements of their Olmec predecessors. Maya
priests studied astronomy and mathematics, and they devised both a sophisticated calendar and an elaborate system of writing. They understood the movements of heavenly
bodies well enough to plot planetary cycles and predict eclipses of the sun and moon.
They invented the concept of zero and used a symbol to represent zero mathematically, which facilitated their manipulation of large numbers. By combining their astro-

ben06937.Ch06_132-155.qxd

7/27/07

8:04 AM

Page 141

CHAPTER 6 |

Early Societies in the Americas and Oceania

141

In this mural from a
Maya temple at
Bonampak, musicians
lead a ceremony to
celebrate the designation of an heir to
the local king.

nomical observations and mathematical reasoning, Maya priests calculated the length
of the solar year at 365.242 days—about seventeen seconds shorter than the figure
reached by modern astronomers.
Maya priests constructed the most elaborate calendar of the ancient Americas. Its
complexity reflected a powerful urge to identify meaningful cycles of time and to
understand human events in the context of those cycles. The Maya calendar interwove
two kinds of year: a solar year of 365 days governed the agricultural cycle, and a ritual
year of 260 days governed daily affairs by organizing time into twenty “months” of
thirteen days apiece. The Maya believed that each day derived certain specific characteristics from its position in both the solar and the ritual calendar and that the combined attributes of each day would determine the fortune of activities undertaken on
that day. It took fifty-two years for the two calendars to work through all possible combinations of days and return simultaneously to their respective starting points, so
18,980 different combinations of characteristics could influence the prospects of an individual day. Maya priests carefully studied the various opportunities and dangers that
would come together on a given day in hopes that they could determine which activities were safe to initiate. Apart from calculating the prospects of individual days, the
Maya attributed especially great significance to the fifty-two-year periods in which the
two calendars ran. They believed that the end of a cycle would bring monumental
changes and that ultimately the world would end after one such cycle.

The Maya Calendar

ben06937.Ch06_132-155.qxd

142

PART I |

7/27/07

8:04 AM

Page 142

The Early Complex Societies, 3500 to 500 B.C.E.

Maya Writing

Maya Religious
Thought

Bloodletting Rituals

The Maya Ball Game

While building on the calendrical calculations of the Olmecs, the
Maya also expanded upon their
predecessors’ tradition of written inscriptions. In doing so they created
the most flexible and sophisticated
of all the early American systems of
writing. The Maya script contained
both ideographic elements (like Chinese characters) and symbols for syllables. Scholars have begun to decipher this script only since the 1960s,
and it has become clear that writing
was just as important to the Maya as
it was to early complex societies in
the eastern hemisphere. Maya scribes
wrote works of history, poetry, and
myth, and they also kept genealogical, administrative, and astronomical
records. Most Maya writing survives
today in the form of inscriptions on
temples and monuments, but scribes
produced untold numbers of books
In this stone relief sculpture, a Maya king from
written on paper made from beaten
Yaxchilán (between Tikal and Palenque in the
tree bark or on vellum made from
southern Yucatan peninsula) holds a torch over
deerskin. When Spanish conquerors
a woman from the royal family as she draws
and missionaries arrived in Maya
a thorn-studded rope through a hole in her
lands in the sixteenth century C.E.,
tongue, so as to shed her blood in honor of
the Maya gods.
however, they destroyed all the books
they could find in hopes of undermining native religious beliefs. Today only four books of the ancient Maya survive,
all dealing with astronomical and calendrical matters.
Surviving inscriptions and other writings shed considerable light on Maya religious
and cultural traditions. The Popol Vuh, a Maya creation myth, taught that the gods had
created human beings out of maize and water, the ingredients that became human
flesh and blood. Thus Maya religious thought reflected the fundamental role of agriculture in their society, much like religious thought in early complex societies of the eastern hemisphere. Maya priests also taught that the gods kept the world going and
maintained the agricultural cycle in exchange for honors and sacrifices performed for
them by human beings.
The most important of those sacrifices involved the shedding of human blood, which
the Maya believed would prompt the gods to send rain to water their crops of maize.
Some bloodletting rituals centered on war captives. Before sacrificing the victims by decapitation, their captors cut off the ends of their fingers or lacerated their bodies so as to
cause a copious flow of blood in honor of the gods. Yet the Maya did not look upon
those rituals simply as opportunities to torture their enemies. The frequent and voluntary shedding of royal blood, as in the case of Chan Bahlum’s self-sacrifice at Palenque,
testifies to the depth of Maya convictions that they inhabited a world created and sustained by deities who expected honor and reverence from their human subjects.
Apart from the calendar and sacrificial rituals, the Maya also inherited a distinctive
ball game from the Olmecs. The game sometimes pitted two men against each other,
but it often involved teams of two to four members apiece. (There is no evidence that

ben06937.Ch06_132-155.qxd

7/27/07

8:04 AM

Page 143

CHAPTER 6 |

Early Societies in the Americas and Oceania

143

Sources from the Past
The Popol Vuh on the Creation of Human Beings
The Popol Vuh outlines traditional Maya views on the creation of the world and human beings. The version of the work
that survives today dates from the mid-sixteenth century, but it reflects beliefs of a much earlier era. According to the
Popol Vuh, the gods wanted to create intelligent beings that would recognize and praise them. Three times they tried to
fashion such beings out of animals, mud, and wood, but without success. Then they decided to use maize and water as
their ingredients.
And here is the beginning of the conception of humans,
and of the search for the ingredients of the human body.
So they spoke, the [gods] Bearer, Begetter, the Makers,
Modelers named Sovereign Plumed Serpent:
“The dawn has approached, preparations have been
made, and morning has come for the provider, nurturer,
born in the light, begotten in the light. Morning has
come for humankind, for the people of the face of the
earth,” they said. It all came together as they went on
thinking in the darkness, in the night, as they searched
and they sifted, they thought and they wondered.
And here their thoughts came out in clear light.
They sought and discovered what was needed for human
flesh. . . . Broken Place, Bitter Water Place is the name:
the yellow corn, white corn came from there. . . .
And these were the ingredients for the flesh of the
human work, the human design, and the water was for
the blood. It became human blood, and corn was also
used by the Bearer, Begetter. . . .
And then the yellow corn and white corn were
ground, and Xmucane did the grinding nine times. Corn
was used, along with the water she rinsed her hands
with, for the creation of grease; it became human fat
when it was worked by the Bearer, Begetter, Sovereign
Plumed Serpent, as they are called. . . .
It was staples alone that made up their flesh.
These are the names of the first people who were
made and modeled.
This is the first person: Jaguar Quitze.
And now the second: Jaguar Night.
And now the third: Mahucutah.
And the fourth: True Jaguar.
And these are the names of our first mother-fathers.
They were simply made and modeled, it is said; they had

no mother and no father. We have named the men by
themselves. No woman gave birth to them, nor were
they begotten by the builder, sculptor, Bearer, Begetter.
By sacrifice alone, by genius alone they were made, they
were modeled by the Maker, Modeler, Bearer, Begetter,
Sovereign Plumed Serpent. And when they came to
fruition, they came out human:
They talked and they made words.
They looked and they listened.
They walked, they worked. . . .
And then their wives and women came into being.
Again, the same gods thought of it. It was as if they were
asleep when they received them, truly beautiful women
were there with Jaguar Quitze, Jaguar Night, Mahucutah, and True Jaguar. With their women there they became wider awake. Right away they were happy at heart
again, because of their wives.
Celebrated Seahouse is the name of the wife of
Jaguar Quitze.
Prawn House is the name of the wife of Jaguar Night.
Hummingbird House is the name of the wife of
Mahucutah.
Macaw House is the name of the wife of True Jaguar.
So these are the names of their wives, who became
ladies of rank, giving birth to the people of the tribes,
small and great.
FOR FURTHER REFLECTION

Discuss the extent to which this account of human creation reflects the influences on Maya society of both
agriculture and the untamed natural world.

SOURCE: Dennis Tedlock, trans. Popol Vuh: The Definitive Edition of the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life and the Glories of Gods and
Kings. New York: Simon and Schuster, 1985, pp. 163–65, 167.

ben06937.Ch06_132-155.qxd

144

PART I |

7/27/07

Page 144

The Early Complex Societies, 3500 to 500 B.C.E.

A limestone altar
carved in 796 C.E.
depicts two Maya
kings playing a ritual
ball game to celebrate
the negotiation of an
agreement.

The City of
Teotihuacan

8:04 AM

women played the game.) The object of the game was for players to
score points by propelling a rubber ball through a ring or onto
a marker without using their hands. The Maya used a ball
about 20 centimeters (8 inches) in diameter. Made of solid
baked rubber, the ball was both heavy and hard—a blow
to the head could easily cause a concussion—and players
needed great dexterity and skill to maneuver it accurately using only their feet, legs, hips, torso, shoulders,
or elbows. The game was extremely popular: almost all
Maya ceremonial centers, towns, and cities had stonepaved courts on which players performed publicly.
The Maya played the ball game for several reasons.
Sometimes individuals competed for sporting purposes, and sometimes players or spectators laid bets on
the outcome of contests between professionals. The ball
game figured also in Maya political affairs as a ritual that
honored the conclusion of treaties. High-ranking captives
often engaged in forced public competition in which the stakes
were their very lives: losers became sacrificial victims and faced torture and execution immediately following the match. Alongside some
ball courts were skull racks that bore the severed heads of losing players. Thus Maya
concerns to please the gods by shedding human blood extended even to the realm
of sport.

Heirs of the Olmecs: Teotihuacan
While the Maya flourished in the Mesoamerican lowlands, a different society arose to
the north in the highlands of Mexico. For most of human history, the valley of central Mexico, situated some two kilometers (more than a mile) above sea level, was
the site of several large lakes fed by the waters coming off the surrounding mountains. Most of the lakes have disappeared during the past two or three centuries as a
result of environmental changes and deliberate draining of their waters. In earlier
times, however, their abundant supplies of fish and waterfowl attracted human settlers. The lakes also served as sources of freshwater and as transportation routes linking communities situated on their shores.
The earliest settlers in the valley of Mexico did not build extensive irrigation systems, but they channeled some of the waters from the mountain streams into their
fields and established a productive agricultural society. Expanding human population
led to the congregation of people in cities and the emergence of a complex society in
the Mesoamerican highlands. The earliest center of that society was the large and
bustling city of Teotihuacan, located about 50 kilometers (31 miles) northeast of
modern Mexico City.
Teotihuacan was probably a large agricultural village by 500 B.C.E. It expanded rapidly after about 200 B.C.E., and by the end of the millennium its population approached
fifty thousand. By the year 100 C.E., the city’s two most prominent monuments, the
colossal pyramids of the sun and the moon, dominated the skyline. The Pyramid of the
Sun is the largest single structure in Mesoamerica. It occupies nearly as much space as
the pyramid of Khufu in Egypt, though it stands only half as tall. At its high point,
about 400 to 600 C.E., Teotihuacan was home to almost two hundred thousand inhabitants, a thriving metropolis with scores of temples, several palatial residences,
neighborhoods with small apartments for the masses, busy markets, and hundreds of
workshops for artisans and craftsmen.

ben06937.Ch06_132-155.qxd

7/27/07

8:04 AM

Page 145

CHAPTER 6 |

Early Societies in the Americas and Oceania

Aerial view of Teotihuacan, looking toward the Pyramid of the Moon (top center) from the
Pyramid of the Sun (bottom left). Shops and residences occupied the spaces surrounding the
main street and the pyramids.

The organization of a large urban population, along with the hinterland that supported it, required a recognized source of authority. Although Teotihuacan generated
large numbers of books and records that perhaps would have shed light on the character of that authority, they unfortunately perished when the city itself declined. Paintings and murals suggest that Teotihuacan was a theocracy of sorts. Priests figure
prominently in the works of art, and scholars interpret many figures as representations
of deities. Priests were crucial to the survival of the society, since they kept the calendar
and ensured that planting and harvesting took place at the appropriate seasons. Thus it
would not have been unusual for them to govern Teotihuacan in the name of the gods,
or at least to cooperate closely with a secular ruling class.
Apart from rulers and priests, Teotihuacan’s population included cultivators, artisans, and merchants. Perhaps as many as two-thirds of the city’s inhabitants worked
during the day in fields surrounding Teotihuacan and returned to their small apartments in the city at night. Artisans of Teotihuacan were especially famous for their obsidian tools and fine orange pottery, and scholars have identified numerous workshops
and stores where toolmakers and potters produced and marketed their goods within the
city itself. The residents of Teotihuacan also participated in extensive trade and exchange
networks. Professional merchants traded their products throughout Mesoamerica. Archaeologists have found numerous samples of the distinctive obsidian tools and orange
pottery at sites far distant from Teotihuacan, from the region of modern Guatemala
City in the south to Durango and beyond in the north.
Until about 500 C.E. there was little sign of military organization in Teotihuacan.
The city did not have defensive walls, and works of art rarely depicted warriors. Yet the
influence of Teotihuacan extended to much of modern Mexico and beyond. The Maya
capital of Kaminaljuyú, for example, fell under the influence of Teotihuacan during the
fourth century C.E. Although the rulers of Teotihuacan may have established colonies
to protect their sources of obsidian and may have undertaken military expeditions to
back up their authority throughout central Mexico, the city’s influence apparently derived less from military might than from its ability to produce fine manufactured goods
that appealed to consumers in distant markets.

The Society
of Teotihuacan

145

ben06937.Ch06_132-155.qxd

146

PART I |

7/27/07

Page 146

The Early Complex Societies, 3500 to 500 B.C.E.

Cultural Traditions

Decline of
Teotihuacan

8:04 AM

Like the Maya, the residents of Teotihuacan built on cultural foundations established by the Olmecs. They played the ball game, adapted the Olmec calendar to their
own uses, and expanded the Olmecs’ graphic symbols into a complete system of writing. Unfortunately, only a few samples of their writing survive in stone carvings. Because their books have all perished, it is impossible to know exactly how they viewed
the world and their place in it. Works of art suggest that they recognized an earth god
and a rain god, and it is certain that they carried out human sacrifices during their religious rituals.
Teotihuacan began to experience increasing military pressure from other peoples
around 500 C.E. Works of art from this period frequently depicted eagles, jaguars, and
coyotes—animals that Mesoamericans associated with fighting and military conquest.
After about 650 C.E. Teotihuacan entered a period of decline. About the middle of the
eighth century invaders sacked and burned the city, destroying its books and monuments. After that catastrophe most residents deserted Teotihuacan, and the city slowly
fell into ruin.

Early Societies of South America
By about 12,000 B.C.E. hunting and gathering peoples had made their way across the
narrow isthmus of Central America and into South America. Those who migrated into
the region of the northern and central Andes mountains hunted deer, llama, alpaca, and
other large animals. Both the mountainous highlands and the coastal regions below benefited from a cool and moist climate that provided natural harvests of squashes, gourds,
and wild potatoes. Beginning about 8000 B.C.E., however, the climate of this whole region became increasingly warm and dry, and the changes placed pressure on natural
food supplies. To maintain their numbers, the human communities of the region began
to experiment with agriculture. Here, as elsewhere, agriculture encouraged population
growth, the establishment of villages and cities, the building of states, and the elaboration of organized cultural traditions. During the centuries after 1000 B.C.E., the central
Andean region generated complex societies parallel to those of Mesoamerica.

Early Andean Society and the Chavín Cult

Early Agriculture
in South America

Although they were exact contemporaries, early Mesoamerican and Andean societies
developed largely independently. The heartland of early Andean society was the region
now occupied by the states of Peru and Bolivia. Geography discouraged the establishment of communications between the Andean region and Mesoamerica because neither society possessed abundant pack animals or a technology to facilitate long-distance
transportation. Neither the Andes mountains nor the lowlands of modern Panama and
Nicaragua offered an attractive highway linking the two regions. Several agricultural
products and technologies diffused slowly from one area to the other: cultivation of
maize and squashes spread from its Mesoamerican home to the central Andean region
while Andean gold, silver, and copper metallurgy traveled north to Mesoamerica.
Geography conspired even against the establishment of communications within the
central Andean region. Deep valleys crease the western flank of the Andes mountains,
as rivers drain waters from the highlands to the Pacific Ocean, so transportation and
communication between the valleys has always been difficult. Nevertheless, powerful
Andean states sometimes overcame the difficulties and influenced human affairs as far
away as modern Ecuador and Colombia to the north and northern Chile to the south.
Most of the early Andean heartland came under cultivation between 2500 and 2000
B.C.E., and permanent settlements dotted the coastal regions in particular. The earliest

ben06937.Ch06_132-155.qxd

7/27/07

8:04 AM

Page 147

CHAPTER 6 |

Early Societies in the Americas and Oceania

Or

i

cultivators of the region reCaribbean Sea
lied on beans, peanuts, and
sweet potatoes as their main
food crops. They also cultivated cotton, which they
iver
oR
oc
n
used to make fishnets and
textiles. The rich marine life
of the Pacific Ocean supplemented agricultural harvests,
Equator
Nap
enabling coastal peoples to
o
r
Am on Rive
.
build an increasingly complex
az
PA C I F I C
society. Settlements probably
OCEAN
appeared later in the Andean
highlands than in the coastal
Chavín de Huántar
regions, but many varieties of
potato supported agricultural
U
communities in the highlands
N Lake Titicaca
T
after about 2000 B.C.E. By
1800 B.C.E. Andean peoples
Moche and Chimu
were constructing canals and
Huari
irrigation systems to support
Tiahuanaco
cultivation on the dry lands at
the mouths of the western
1000 mi
0
050
Andean valleys. They also
2000 km
1000
0
had begun to fashion distinctive styles of pottery and to
build temples and pyramids in large ceremonial centers.
Shortly after the year 1000 B.C.E., a new religion appeared suddenly in the central
Andes. The Chavín cult, which enjoyed enormous popularity during the period 900 to
800 B.C.E., spread through most of the territory occupied by modern Peru and then
vanished about 300 B.C.E. Unfortunately, no information survives to indicate the precise significance of the cult, nor even its proper name: scholars have named it after the
modern town of Chavín de Huántar, one of the cult’s most prominent sites. One theory suggests that the cult arose when maize became an important crop in South America. The capacity of maize to support large populations might well have served as the
stimulus for the emergence of a cult designed to promote fertility and abundant harvests. In any case the large temple complexes and elaborate works of art that accompanied the cult demonstrate its importance to those who honored it. Devotees produced
intricate stone carvings representing their deities with the features of humans and wild
animals such as jaguars, hawks, eagles, and snakes. The extensive distribution of the
temples and carvings shows that the Chavín cult seized the imagination of agricultural
peoples throughout the central Andean region.
During the era of the Chavín cult, Andean society became increasingly complex.
Weavers devised techniques of producing elaborate cotton textiles, some with intricate patterns and designs. Artisans manufactured large, light, and strong fishnets
from cotton string. Craftsmen experimented with minerals and discovered techniques
of gold, silver, and copper metallurgy. They mostly fashioned metals into pieces of
jewelry or other decorative items but also made small tools out of copper.
There is no evidence to suggest that Chavín cultural and religious beliefs led to the
establishment of a state or any organized political order. Indeed, they probably inspired
the building of ceremonial centers rather than the making of true cities. As the population increased and society became more complex, however, cities began to appear

147

Map 6.2 Early societies
of Andean South America,
1000 B.C.E.–700 C.E. The early
societies of Andean South
America occupied long, narrow
territories between the Andes
Mountains and the Pacific
Ocean. Why did these societies
not occupy territories to the
east?

R

AN

D

E

S

M

O

A

IN

S

The Chavín Cult

Early Cities

ben06937.Ch06_132-155.qxd

148

PART I |

7/27/07

8:04 AM

Page 148

The Early Complex Societies, 3500 to 500 B.C.E.

shortly after the disappearance of the Chavín cult. Beginning about 200 B.C.E. large
cities emerged at the modern-day sites of Huari, Pucara, and Tiahuanaco. Each of these
early Andean cities had a population exceeding ten thousand, and each also featured
large public buildings, ceremonial plazas, and extensive residential districts.

Early Andean States: Mochica
Political and
Economic Integration
of the Andean Valleys

Along with cities there also appeared regional states. The earliest Andean states arose
in the many valleys on the western side of the mountains. These states emerged when
conquerors unified the individual valleys and organized them into integrated societies.
They coordinated the building of irrigation systems so that the lower valleys could
support intensive agriculture, and they established trade and exchange networks that
tied the highlands, the central valleys, and the coastal regions together. Each region
contributed products to the larger economy of the valley: from the highlands came
potatoes, llama meat, and alpaca wool; the central valleys supplied maize, beans, and
squashes; and the coasts provided sweet potatoes, fish, and cotton.
This organization of the Andean valleys into integrated economic zones did not
come about by accident. Builders of early Andean states worked deliberately and did
not hesitate to use force to consolidate their domains. Surviving stone fortifications
and warriors depicted in works of art testify that the early Andean states relied heavily on arms to introduce order and maintain stability in their small realms.
The Mochica State
Because early Andean societies did not make use of writing, their beliefs, values, and
ways of life remain largely unknown. One of the early
Andean states, however, left a remarkable artistic legacy
that allows a glimpse into the life of a society otherwise
almost entirely lost. The Mochica state had its base in
the valley of the Moche River, and it dominated the
coasts and valleys of northern Peru during the period
about 300 to 700 C.E. Mochica painting survives largely
on pottery vessels, and it offers a detailed and expressive
depiction of early Andean society in all its variety.
Many Mochica ceramics take the form of portraits of
individuals’ heads. Others represent the major gods and
the various subordinate deities and demons. Some of the
most interesting depict scenes in the everyday life of the
Mochica people: aristocrats embarking on a hunting
party, warriors leading captives bound by ropes, women
working in a textile factory under the careful eye of a supervisor, rulers receiving messengers or ambassadors
from neighboring states, and beggars looking for handouts on a busy street. Even in the absence of writing,
Mochica artists left abundant evidence of a complex society with considerable specialization of labor.
Mochica was only one of several large states that
dominated the central Andean region during the first
millennium C.E. Although they integrated the regional
economies of the various Andean valleys, none of those
early states was able to impose order on the entire region or even to dominate a portion of it for very long.
Many Mochica pots portray human figures and often
The exceedingly difficult geographical barriers posed
depict distinctive characteristics of individuals or typical
by the Andes mountains presented challenges that anscenes from daily life. This pot represents two women
cient technology and social organization simply could
helping a man who consumed a little too much maize beer.

ben06937.Ch06_132-155.qxd

7/27/07

8:04 AM

Page 149

CHAPTER 6 |

149

Early Societies in the Americas and Oceania

not meet. In addition, during the sixth and seventh centuries C.E., climatic fluctuations
brought a long series of severe droughts to the Andean region. As a result, by the end
of the first millennium C.E., Mochica and several other Andean societies had disappeared, and Andean society exhibited regional differences much sharper than those
of Mesoamerica and early complex societies in the eastern hemisphere.

Early Societies of Oceania
Human migrants entered Australia and New Guinea at least by 60,000 years before the
present, and possibly earlier than that. They arrived in watercraft—probably rafts, or perhaps canoes fitted with sails—but because of the low sea levels of that era, the migrants
did not have to cross large stretches of open ocean. Those earliest inhabitants of Oceania
also migrated—perhaps over land when sea levels were still low—to the Bismarcks, the
Solomons, and other small island groups near New Guinea. Beginning about 5,000 years
ago, seafaring peoples from southeast Asia visited the northern coast of New Guinea for
purposes of trade. Some of them settled there, but many others ventured farther and established communities in the island groups of the western Pacific Ocean. During the
centuries that followed, their descendants sailed large, oceangoing canoes throughout
the Pacific basin, and by the middle centuries of the first millennium C.E., they had established human communities in all the habitable islands of the Pacific Ocean.

Early Societies in Australia and New Guinea
Human migrants reached Australia and New Guinea long before any people had begun
to cultivate crops or keep herds of domesticated animals. Inevitably, then, the earliest
inhabitants of Australia and New Guinea lived by hunting and gathering their food. For
thousands of years, foraging peoples probably traveled back and forth between Australia

MARIANA
ISLANDS

Map 6.3 Early societies
of Oceania, 1500 B.C.E.–
700 C.E. Notice the routes that
Austronesian migrants followed. What technologies
enabled Austronesian peoples
to travel so widely and to
maintain an extensive communication and exchange network
in the western and central
regions of the Pacific Ocean?

HAWAII

Early centuries
B.C.E.

GUAM

PHILIPPINES

CAROLINE IS
LA

IN

DON

MARSHALL
ISLANDS

MICRONESIA

S

SOLOMON
ISLANDS

4000
B.C.E.

Torres Strait
Cape York

to Madagascar

C.E.

BISMARCK
ISLANDS

NEW
GUI NEA

ESIA

ND

M

EL

P

O

LY

NE

SIA

Late centuries

MARQUESAS

B.C.E.

VANUATU

A

300 C.E.

SAMOA

1500
B.C.E.

N
ES

IA

Alice Springs
AUSTRALIA

PA C I F I C
OCEAN

Early centuries

FIJI

1300 B.C.E.

1000 B.C.E.

TAHITI

TONGA

NEW
CALEDONIA

EASTER
ISLAND

700 C.E.

Land area during last glaciation
NEW
ZEALAND
0
0

2000

1000
2000

Present-day shorelines
Routes of Austronesian migrations

3000 mi
4000

Extent of Lapita settlement

6000 km

ben06937.Ch06_132-155.qxd

150

PART I |

7/27/07

Page 150

The Early Complex Societies, 3500 to 500 B.C.E.

Early Hunting and
Gathering Societies
in Australia

Austronesian Peoples

Early Agriculture
in New Guinea

8:04 AM

and New Guinea. Those migrations ceased about ten thousand years ago when rising
seas separated the two lands. After that time human societies in Australia and New Guinea
followed radically different paths. The aboriginal peoples of Australia maintained hunting
and gathering societies until large numbers of Europeans established settler communities
there in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries C.E. New Guinea peoples, however,
turned to agriculture: beginning about 3000 B.C.E. the cultivation of root crops such as
yams and taro and the keeping of pigs and chickens spread rapidly throughout the island.
Like hunting and gathering peoples elsewhere, the aboriginal Australians lived in
small, mobile communities that undertook seasonal migrations in search of food. Over
the centuries, they learned to exploit the resources of the various ecological regions of
Australia. Plant foods, including fruits, berries, roots, nuts, seeds, shoots, and green
leaves, constituted the bulk of their diet. In the tropical region of Cape York in northern Australia, they consumed no fewer than 141 species of plants. Aboriginal peoples
found abundant plant life even in the harsh desert regions of interior Australia. In the
vicinity of modern Alice Springs in central Australia, for example, they included about
20 species of greens and 45 kinds of seeds and nuts in their diet. They also used at least
124 plants as medicines, ointments, and drugs. To supplement their plant-based diet,
they used axes, spears, clubs, nets, lassos, snares, and boomerangs to bring down animals ranging in size from rats to giant kangaroos, which grew to a height of 3 meters
(almost 10 feet), and to catch fish, waterfowl, and small birds.
The earliest inhabitants of New Guinea foraged for food, like their neighbors to the
south. About five thousand years ago, however, a process of social and economic
change began to unfold in New Guinea. The agents of change were seafaring peoples
from southeast Asia speaking Austronesian languages, whose modern linguistic relatives include Malayan, Indonesian, Filipino, Polynesian, and other Oceanic languages
as well as the Malagasy language of Madagascar and the tongues spoken by the indigenous peoples of Taiwan and southern China. Austronesian-speaking peoples possessed
remarkable seafaring skills. They sailed the open ocean in large canoes equipped with
outriggers, which stabilized their craft and reduced the risks of long voyages. By paying
close attention to winds, currents, stars, cloud formations, and other natural indicators,
they learned how to find distant lands reliably and return home safely. Beginning about
3000 B.C.E. these mariners visited the northern coast of New Guinea, where they traded
with the indigenous peoples and established their own communities.
Austronesian seafarers came from societies that depended on the cultivation of root
crops and the herding of animals. When they settled in New Guinea, they introduced
yams, taro, pigs, and chickens to the island, and the indigenous peoples themselves soon
began to cultivate crops and keep animals. Within a few centuries agriculture and
herding had spread to all parts of New Guinea. Here, as in other lands, agriculture brought
population growth and specialization of labor: after the change to agriculture, permanent
settlements, pottery, and carefully crafted tools appeared throughout the island.
Separated from New Guinea only by the narrow Torres Strait, the aboriginal peoples of northern Australia knew about the cultivation of foodstuffs, since they had occasional dealings with traders from New Guinea. Agriculture even spread to the islands
of the Torres Strait, but it did not take root in Australia until the arrival of European
peoples in the late eighteenth century C.E. Meanwhile, Austronesian-speaking peoples
who introduced agriculture and herding to New Guinea sailed their outrigger canoes
farther and established the first human settlements in the islands of the Pacific Ocean.

The Peopling of the Pacific Islands
The hunting and gathering peoples who first inhabited Australia and New Guinea also
established a few settlements in the Bismarck and Solomon island groups east of New

ben06937.Ch06_132-155.qxd

7/27/07

8:04 AM

Page 151

CHAPTER 6 |

Early Societies in the Americas and Oceania

151

Austronesian mariners sailed doublehulled voyaging
canoes much like
those from Ra`iatea
in the Society Islands,
drawn in 1769 by an
artist who accompanied Captain James
Cook on his first
voyage in the Pacific
Ocean.

Guinea. They ventured to those islands during the era when the seas were low and sailing distances from New Guinea were consequently very short. They did not have the
maritime technology, however, to sail far beyond the Solomons to the more distant islands in the Pacific Ocean. Even if they had, the small Pacific islands, with limited supplies of edible plants and animals, would not have supported communities of foragers.
Austronesian-speaking peoples possessed a sophisticated maritime technology as
well as agricultural expertise, and they established settlements in the islands of the
Pacific Ocean. They sailed large, ocean-going canoes with twin hulls joined by a deck
on which they carried supplies. When they found uninhabited lands, their food crops
and domesticated animals enabled them to establish agricultural societies in the islands. Once they had established coastal settlements in New Guinea, Austronesian
seafarers sailed easily to the Bismarck and Solomon islands, perhaps in the interests
of trade. From there they undertook exploratory voyages that led them to previously
unpopulated islands.
By about 1500 B.C.E. Austronesian mariners had arrived at Vanuatu (formerly called
New Hebrides) and New Caledonia, by 1300 B.C.E. at Fiji, and by 1000 B.C.E. at Tonga
and Samoa. During the late centuries of the first millennium B.C.E., they established
settlements in Tahiti and the Marquesas. From there they launched ventures that took
them to the most remote outposts of Polynesia—the territory falling in the triangle
with Hawai`i, Easter Island, and New Zealand at the points—which required them to
sail over thousands of nautical miles of blue water. They reached the islands of Hawai`i
in the early centuries C.E., Easter Island by 300 C.E., and the large islands of New
Zealand by 700 C.E.
While one branch of the Austronesian-speaking peoples populated the islands of
Polynesia, other branches sailed in different directions. From the Philippines some ventured to the region of Micronesia, which includes small islands and atolls such as the
Mariana, Caroline, and Marshall islands of the western Pacific. Yet others looked west
from their homelands in Indonesia, sailed throughout the Indian Ocean, and became
the first human settlers of the large island of Madagascar off the east African coast.
Malagasy, the principal language of modern-day Madagascar, is clearly identifiable as
an Austronesian tongue.
The earliest Austronesian migrants to sail out into the Pacific Ocean and establish
settlements in Pacific islands are known as the Lapita peoples. No one knows what they
called themselves: the name Lapita comes from a beach in New Caledonia where some
of the earliest recognizable Lapita artifacts came to the attention of archaeologists. It is

Austronesian
Migrations to
Polynesia

Austronesian
Migrations to
Micronesia and
Madagascar

The Lapita Peoples

ben06937.Ch06_132-155.qxd

152

PART I |

7/27/07

8:04 AM

Page 152

The Early Complex Societies, 3500 to 500 B.C.E.

clear, however, that between about 1500 and 500
B.C.E., Lapita peoples maintained communication and
exchange networks throughout a large region extending about 4,500 kilometers (2,800 miles) from New
Guinea and the Bismarck Archipelago to Samoa and
Tonga.
Wherever they settled, Lapita peoples established
agricultural villages where they raised pigs and chickens
and introduced the suite of crops they inherited from
their Austronesian ancestors, including yams, taro,
breadfruit, and bananas. They supplemented their
crops and domesticated animals with fish and seaweed
from nearby waters, and they soon killed off most of
the large land animals and birds (some of which, in the
absence of natural predators, had evolved into flightless species) that were suitable for human consumption.
They left abundant evidence of their presence in the
form of their distinctive pottery decorated with stamped
This reconstructed Lapita pot discovered in New
geometric designs.
Caledonia features the distinctive stamped design
For about one thousand years, Lapita peoples maincharacteristic of all Lapita pottery.
tained extensive networks of trade and communication
across vast stretches of open ocean. Their agricultural
settlements were largely self-sufficient, but they placed high value on some objects from
distant islands. Their pottery was a principal item of long-distance exchange, as was
high-quality obsidian, which they sometimes transported over thousands of kilometers,
since it was available at only a few sites of Lapita settlement. Other trade items brought
to light by archaeologists include shell jewelry and stone tools. It is likely that Lapita
peoples also traded feathers, foodstuffs, and spouses, although evidence for those exchanges does not survive in the archaeological record. In any case, it is clear that like
their counterparts in other regions of the world, the earliest inhabitants of the Pacific islands maintained regular contacts with peoples well beyond their societies.
Chiefly Political
After about 500 B.C.E. Lapita trade networks fell into disuse, probably because the
Organization
various Lapita settlements had grown large enough that they could supply their own
needs and concentrate on the development of their own societies. By the middle part
of the first millennium B.C.E., Lapita and other Austronesian peoples had established
hierarchical chiefdoms in the Pacific islands. Leadership passed from a chief to his eldest son, and near relatives constituted a local aristocracy. Contests for power and influence between ambitious subordinates frequently caused tension and turmoil, but
the possibility of migration offered an alternative to conflict. Dissatisfied or aggrieved
parties often built voyaging canoes, recruited followers, and set sail with the intention
of establishing new settlements in uninhabited or lightly populated islands. Indeed, the
spread of Austronesian peoples throughout the Pacific islands came about partly because of population pressures and conflicts that encouraged small parties to seek fresh
opportunities in more hospitable lands.
Over the longer term, descendants of Lapita peoples built strong, chiefly societies,
particularly on large islands with relatively dense populations like those of the Tongan,
Samoan, and Hawaiian groups. In Hawai`i, for example, militarily skilled chiefs cooperated closely with priests, administrators, soldiers, and servants in ruling their districts,
which might include a portion of an island, an entire island, or even several islands.
Chiefs and their retinues claimed a portion of the agricultural surplus produced by
their subjects, and they sometimes required subjects to deliver additional products,
such as fish, birds, or timber. Apart from organizing public life in their own districts,

ben06937.Ch06_132-155.qxd

7/27/07

8:04 AM

Page 153

CHAPTER 6 |

Early Societies in the Americas and Oceania

153

Sources from the Past
The Voyage of Ru
Numerous chants and stories of Pacific islanders preserve the memory of ancient seafarers who built oceangoing
canoes, equipped them with supplies, and sailed off in search of new lands. Many of the mariners mentioned in those
stories set out from Havai`i (modern-day Ra`iatea near Tahiti). The stories mention several motives for the voyages:
overpopulation, social tensions, and thirst for adventure. The following selection explains how the navigator Ru
undertook a voyage from Havai`i to the previously uninhabited island of Aitutaki in the Southern Cook Islands.
Although not of royal blood, Ru was a man of good
standing. He was a peace-loving man, but ambitious of
becoming a leader, and [he] viewed with concern the
quickly-increasing population of the island.
Moved by a quarrel over the headship of his clan, Ru
began to make plans. He decided to build a large seaworthy canoe and call together his friends and relations,
and try to persuade enough of them to join him in
searching for an uninhabited island somewhere toward
the setting sun, where he felt sure he would find land and
become a great chief. [He persuaded his four younger
brothers, his four wives, and twenty young women from
the ruling family of Havai’i to accompany him] . . .
A search was then made for two large tamanu trees
suitable for a canoe for the voyage. The making of this
canoe was a lengthy process, for the trees had to be
felled and hewn out with stone adzes. When finished to
Ru’s satisfaction, the two hulls were hauled down to the
beach and lashed together. . . . Some further days were
spent training for the coming voyage. The canoe and the
mat-sails were tested, and much time was spent handling
and paddling the canoe until the crew were proficient.
For two days friends and relatives assisted in gathering
enough food for the voyage. Taro, puraka [pig], kuru
[breadfruit], and a large supply of water were put on
board. All record of how the water was carried has been
lost. Some say it was carried in coconuts.
The next morning, the wind being favorable, Ru decided to set sail. The whole island came to say farewell
to the twenty-nine voyagers. The reef was cleared, the
sails were hoisted, and the canoe was headed toward the

west, Ru taking the steering oar, and his brother Verituamaroa standing in the bows as pilot. Though conditions were favorable for the first two days, the women
were sick as soon as the canoe was out of sight of the
land. On the third day heavy clouds banked up, the
wind, which had changed round, now blew strongly
from the west, and the sea was so rough that the women
and men had to take turns bailing the canoe; she was
riding heavily owing to the hulls being new and deeply
laden. [The voyaging party survived the storm] . . .
Favorable weather was met for the next two days and
each night Ru checked his course by a star. On the third
afternoon after the storm, Verituamaroa, who was still in
the bows of the canoe, cried out that he could see land
ahead. It was thought that he might have been deceived
by a bank of clouds, but soon they could clearly see the
break of waves on the reef. All now gazed eagerly at the
new land. After a search a suitable passage was found
[through the reef ], the sails were taken down, and the
women were ordered to paddle the canoe in. . . .
Finding the island uninhabited, Ru divided it among
the twenty young women, as they were of royal blood
and consequently had first claim to the land. Ru told
them that they were as mats on the floor, as other canoes were bound to come sooner or later bringing men
with them. On these mats the men would sleep, and
from them this new land would be populated.
FOR FURTHER REFLECTION

What does Ru’s story suggest about the nature of social
and gender relations in early Pacific islands populations?

SOURCE: Drury Low. “The Story of Ru’s Canoe and the Discovery and Settlement of Aitutaki.”
Journal of the Polynesian Society 43 (1934): 17–24.

chiefs and their administrators vied with the ruling classes of neighboring districts, led
public ritual observances, and oversaw irrigation systems that watered the taro plants
that were crucial to the survival of Hawaiian society. Eventually, the chiefly and aristocratic classes became so entrenched and powerful that they regarded themselves as divine or semidivine, and the law of the land prohibited common subjects from even
gazing directly at them.

ben06937.Ch06_132-155.qxd

154

PART I |

7/27/07

8:04 AM

Page 154

The Early Complex Societies, 3500 to 500 B.C.E.

L

ittle writing survives to illuminate the historical development of early societies in the
Americas and Oceania. Thus it is impossible to offer the sort of richly detailed account

of their political organization, social structures, and cultural traditions that historians
commonly provide for societies of the eastern hemisphere. Nevertheless, it is clear that
migrations to the Americas and Oceania represented continuations of population movements that began with Homo erectus and early Homo sapiens, resulting eventually in the
establishment of human communities in almost all habitable parts of the earth. Moreover, it is clear that the earliest inhabitants of the Americas and Oceania built productive
and vibrant societies whose development roughly paralleled that of their counterparts
in the eastern hemisphere. Many communities depended on an agricultural economy,
and with their surplus production they supported dense populations, engaged in specialized labor, established formal political authorities, constructed hierarchical social orders,
carried on long-distance trade, and formed distinctive cultural traditions. The early historical development of the Americas and Oceania demonstrates once again the tendency
of agriculture to encourage human communities to construct ever more elaborate and
complex forms of social organization.

C H R O N O L O G Y
AMERICAS
13,000 B.C.E.

Human migration to North America from Siberia

8000–7000 B.C.E.

Origins of agriculture in Mesoamerica

4000 B.C.E.

Origins of maize cultivation in Mesoamerica

3000 B.C.E.

Origins of agriculture in South America

1200–100 B.C.E.

Olmec society

1000–300 B.C.E.

Chavín cult

200 B.C.E.–750 C.E.

Teotihuacan society

300–1100 C.E.

Maya society

300–700 C.E.

Mochica society
OCEANIA

60,000 B.C.E.

Human migration to Australia and New Guinea

3000 B.C.E.

Origins of agriculture in New Guinea

3000 B.C.E.

Austronesian migrations to New Guinea

1500–500 B.C.E.

Lapita society

1500 B.C.E.–700 C.E.

Austronesian migrations to Pacific islands

ben06937.Ch06_132-155.qxd

7/27/07

8:04 AM

Page 155

CHAPTER 6 |

F O R

F U R T H E R

Early Societies in the Americas and Oceania

155

R E A D I N G

Robert McC. Adams. The Evolution of Urban Society. Chicago,
1966. Provocative analysis comparing the development of
Mesopotamian and Mesoamerican societies by a leading
archaeologist.
Peter Bellwood. The Polynesians: Prehistory of an Island People.
Rev. ed. London, 1987. Well-illustrated popular account emphasizing the origins and early development of Polynesian
societies.
Ignacio Bernal. Mexico before Cortez: Art, History, and Legend.
Trans. by W. Barnstone. Garden City, 1963. Judicious survey by a leading student of ancient Mesoamerica.
———. The Olmec World. Trans. by D. Heyden and F. Horcasitas. Berkeley, 1969. The best general study of the Olmecs.
Geoffrey Blainey. Triumph of the Nomads: A History of Aboriginal Australia. Melbourne, 1975. A sympathetic account of
Australia before European arrival, well informed by archaeological discoveries.
Michael D. Coe. The Maya. 4th ed. London, 1987. Well-illustrated popular account by one of the world’s leading scholars
of the Maya.
Nigel Davies. The Ancient Kingdoms of Mexico. Harmondsworth,
1983. Popular account that reflects archaeological discoveries.
David Freidel, Linda Schele, and Joy Parker. Maya Cosmos: Three
Thousand Years on the Shaman’s Path. New York, 1993. Fascinating investigation of Maya conceptions of the world and
their continuing influence in the present day.
K. R. Howe. The Quest for Origins: Who First Discovered and Settled the Pacific Islands? Honolulu, 2003. Reviews the numerous theories advanced to explain the arrival of human populations and the establishment of human societies in the
remote islands of the Pacific Ocean.
Jesse D. Jennings, ed. The Prehistory of Polynesia. Cambridge,
Mass., 1979. Brings together essays by prominent scholars on
Polynesia before the arrival of Europeans in the Pacific Ocean.
Friedrich Katz. The Ancient American Civilizations. Trans. by
K. M. L. Simpson. New York, 1972. Detailed survey that compares the experiences of Mesoamerica and Andean South
America.
Patrick V. Kirch. The Lapita Peoples: Ancestors of the Oceanic World.
Cambridge, Mass., 1997. Thorough discussion of Lapita society drawing heavily on the author’s own research.

———. On the Road of the Winds: An Archaeological History of
the Pacific Islands before European Contact. Berkeley, 2000.
A valuable synthesis of scholarship by the foremost contemporary archaeologist of the Pacific islands.
Edward P. Lanning. Peru before the Incas. Englewood Cliffs,
1967. Summarizes the results of archaeological research that
has transformed scholars’ understanding of ancient Andean
societies.
David Lewis. We, the Navigators: The Ancient Art of Landfinding
in the Pacific. Honolulu, 1973. Fascinating reconstruction of
traditional methods of noninstrumental navigation used by
seafaring peoples of the Pacific islands.
Charles C. Mann. 1491: New Revelations of the Americas before
Columbus. New York, 2006. Summarizes a great deal of archaeological research on the pre-Columbian Americas.
Simon Martin and Nikolai Grube. Chronicle of the Maya Kings
and Queens: Deciphering the Dynasties of the Ancient Maya.
London, 2000. Offers an important synthesis of Maya political history on the basis of both inscriptions and archaeological discoveries.
Michael E. Mosley. The Incas and Their Ancestors: The Archaeology of Peru. Rev. ed. London, 2001. A comprehensive survey
of Andean history through the era of the Incas.
Linda Schele and David Freidel. A Forest of Kings: The Untold
Story of the Ancient Maya. New York, 1990. Draws heavily
on deciphered inscriptions in reconstructing the history of
the ancient Maya.
Linda Schele and Mary Ellen Miller. The Blood of Kings: Dynasty
and Ritual in Maya Art. New York, 1986. A richly illustrated
volume that explores Maya society through works of art and
architecture as well as writing.
Dennis Tedlock, trans. Popol Vuh: The Definitive Edition of the
Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life and the Glories of Gods and
Kings. New York, 1985. The best translation of the Popol
Vuh, with an excellent introduction.
David Webster. The Fall of the Ancient Maya: Solving the Mystery
of the Maya Collapse. London, 2002. A careful and readable
analysis of the difficulties that confronted Maya society.

