Persia

THE FORMATION OF
CLASSICAL SOCIETIES,
500 B.C.E. TO 500 C.E.

hortly after Homo sapiens turned to agri-

and India depended on the cultivation of rice,

culture, human communities began to

millet, and wheat, whereas in Persia and the

experiment with methods of social organi-

Mediterranean wheat was the staple food crop.

zation. In several cases the experimentation

In China, packed earth and wood served as the

encouraged the development of complex

principal construction material even for large

societies that integrated the lives and liveli-

public buildings; in India, wood was the most

hoods of peoples over large regions. These

common building material; and in Persia and

early complex societies launched human

the Mediterranean, architects designed buildings

history on a trajectory that it continues to

of brick and stone. The classical societies dif-

follow today. States, social classes, techno-

fered even more strikingly when it came to be-

logical innovation, specialization of labor,

liefs and values. They generated a wide variety

trade, and sophisticated cultural traditions

of ideas about the organization of family and

rank among the most important legacies of

society, the understanding of what constituted

these societies.

proper public and private behavior, the nature

S

of the gods or other powers thought to influence
Toward the end of the first millennium B.C.E.,

human affairs, and proper relationships among

several early societies achieved particularly

human beings, the natural world, and the gods.

high degrees of internal organization, ex-

Despite those differences, these societies faced

tended their authority over extremely large

several common problems. They all confronted

regions, and elaborated especially influential

the challenge, for example, of administering vast

cultural traditions. The most prominent of

territories without advanced technologies of trans-

these societies developed in Persia, China,

portation and communication. Rulers built cen-

India, and the Mediterranean basin. Because

tralized imperial states on a scale much larger

their legacies have endured so long and have

than their predecessors in earlier societies. They

influenced the ways that literally billions of

constructed elaborate systems of bureaucracy

people have led their lives, historians often

and experimented with administrative organi-

refer to them as classical societies.

zation in an effort to secure influence for central

The classical societies of Persia, China, India, and the

governments and extend imperial authority to the far

Mediterranean basin differed from one another in many

reaches of their realms. To encourage political and economic

ways. They raised different food crops, constructed build-

integration of their lands, classical rulers built roads and sup-

ings out of different materials, lived by different legal and

ported networks of trade and communication that linked the

moral codes, and recognized different gods. Classical China

sometimes far-flung regions under their authority.

ben06937.Ch07_156-179.qxd

8/27/07

8:12 AM

Page 157

The classical societies all faced military chal-

In some cases, conflicts escalated into rebel-

lenges, and they raised powerful armies for

lions and civil wars that threatened the very

both defensive and offensive purposes. Mili-

survival of the classical societies.

tary challenges frequently arose from within

All the classical societies engaged in long-

classical societies themselves in the form of re-

distance trade. This trade encouraged economic

bellion, civil war, or conflict between powerful

integration within the societies, since their vari-

factions. External threats came from nomadic

ous regions came to depend on one another

and migratory peoples who sought to share in

for agricultural products and manufactured

the wealth generated by the productive agri-

items. Long-distance trade led also to the estab-

cultural economies of classical societies. Some-

lishment of regular commerce between peoples

times mounted nomadic warriors charged into

of different societies and cultural regions. The

settlements, seized what they wished, and

volume of trade increased dramatically when

departed before the victims could mount a

classical empires pacified large stretches of the

defense. In other cases, migratory peoples

Eurasian landmass. Long-distance trade be-

moved into classical societies in such large

came common enough that a well-established

numbers that they disrupted the established

network of land and sea routes, known collec-

political and social order. In hopes of securing

tively as the silk roads, linked lands as distant

their borders and enhancing the welfare of

as China and Europe.

their lands, rulers of most classical societies

All the classical societies generated sophis-

launched campaigns of expansion that ulti-

ticated cultural and religious traditions. Differ-

mately produced massive imperial states.

ent societies held widely varying beliefs and

The bureaucracies and armies that enabled

values, but their cultural and religious tradi-

classical societies to address some problems

tions offered guidance on moral, religious, po-

effectively created difficulties as well. One

litical, and social issues. Those traditions often

pressing problem revolved around the main-

served as foundations for educational systems

tenance of the bureaucracies and armies. To

that prepared individuals for careers in govern-

finance administrative and military machinery,

ment. As a result, they shaped the values of

rulers of the classical societies all claimed some portion of

people who made law and implemented policy. Several

the agricultural and industrial surplus of their lands in the

cultural and religious traditions also attracted large popu-

form of taxes or tribute. Most of them also required their

lar followings and created institutional structures that en-

subjects to provide uncompensated labor services for

abled them to survive over a long term and extend their

large-scale public projects involving the building and

influence through time.

maintenance of structures such as defensive walls, highways, bridges, and irrigation systems.

Over the centuries, specific political, social, economic,
and cultural features of the classical societies have disap-

The classical societies also faced the challenge of try-

peared. Yet their legacies deeply influenced future soci-

ing to maintain an equitable distribution of land and

eties and in many ways continue to influence the lives of

wealth. As some individuals flourished and accumulated

the world’s peoples. Appreciation of the legacies of classi-

land and wealth, they enjoyed economic advantages

cal societies in Persia, China, India, and the Mediterranean

over their neighbors. Increasingly sharp economic distinc-

basin is crucial for the effort to understand the world’s his-

tions gave rise to tensions that fueled bitter class conflict.

torical development. ■

ben06937.Ch07_156-179.qxd

7

8/27/07

8:12 AM

Page 158

The Empires of Persia

ben06937.Ch07_156-179.qxd

8/27/07

8:12 AM

Page 159

The Rise and Fall of the Persian Empires
The Achaemenid Empire
Decline and Fall of the Achaemenid Empire
The Seleucid, Parthian, and Sasanid Empires

Religions of Salvation
in Classical Persian Society
Zarathustra and His Faith
Religions of Salvation
in a Cosmopolitan Society

Imperial Society and Economy
Social Development in Classical Persia
Economic Foundations of Classical Persia

The Greek historian Herodotus relished a good story, and he related many a tale about the
Persian empire and its conflicts with other peoples, including Greeks. One story had to do with
a struggle between Cyrus, leader of the expanding Persian realm, and Croesus, ruler of the
powerful and wealthy kingdom of Lydia in southwestern Anatolia. Croesus noted the growth
of Persian influence with concern and asked the Greek oracle at Delphi whether to go to war
against Cyrus. The oracle responded that an attack on Cyrus would destroy a great kingdom.
Overjoyed, Croesus lined up his allies and prepared for war. In 546 B.C.E. he launched an
invasion and seized a small town, provoking Cyrus to engage the formidable Lydian cavalry.
The resulting battle was hard fought but inconclusive. Because winter was approaching,
Croesus disbanded his troops and returned to his capital at Sardis, expecting Cyrus to retreat
as well. But Cyrus was a vigorous and unpredictable warrior, and he pursued Croesus to
Sardis. When he learned of the pursuit, Croesus hastily assembled an army to confront the invaders. Cyrus threw it into disarray, however, by advancing a group of warriors mounted on
camels, which spooked the Lydian horses and sent them into headlong flight. Cyrus’s army
then surrounded Sardis and took the city after a siege of only two weeks. Croesus narrowly
escaped death in the battle, but he was taken captive and afterward became an advisor to
Cyrus. Herodotus could not resist pointing out that events proved the Delphic oracle right:
Croesus’s attack on Cyrus did indeed lead to the destruction of a great kingdom—his own.
The victory over Lydia was a major turning point in the development of the Persian empire. Lydia had a reputation as a kingdom of fabulous wealth, partly because it was the first
land to use standardized coins with values guaranteed by the state. Taking advantage of its
coins and its geographic location on the Mediterranean, Lydia conducted maritime trade with
Greece, Egypt, and Phoenicia as well as overland trade with Mesopotamia and Persia. Lydian
wealth and resources gave Cyrus tremendous momentum as he extended Persian authority
to new lands and built the earliest of the vast imperial states of classical times.
Classical Persian society began to take shape during the sixth century B.C.E. when warriors
conquered the region from the Indus River to Egypt and southeastern Europe. Their conquests yielded an enormous realm much larger than the earlier Babylonian or Assyrian empires. The very size of the Persian empire created political and administrative problems for its
rulers. Once they solved those problems, however, a series of Persian-based empires governed much of the territory between India and the Mediterranean Sea for more than a millennium—from the mid-sixth century B.C.E. until the early seventh century C.E.—and brought
centralized political organization to many distinct peoples living over vast geographic spaces.

OPPOSITE:

An enameled tile frieze created about 515 B.C.E. depicts a group of life-sized Persian
archers at the palace of King Darius in Susa.

159

ben06937.Ch07_156-179.qxd

160

PART II |

8/27/07

8:12 AM

Page 160

The Formation of Classical Societies, 500 B.C.E. to 500 C.E.
In organizing their realm, Persian rulers relied heavily on Mesopotamian techniques of
administration, which they adapted to their own needs. Yet they did not hesitate to create
new institutions or adopt new administrative procedures. In the interest of improved communications and military mobility, they also invested resources in the construction of roads and
highways linking the regions of the empire. As a result of those efforts, central administrators
were able to send instructions throughout the empire, dispatch armies in times of turmoil,
and ensure that local officials would carry out imperial policies.
The organization of the vast territories embraced by the classical Persian empires had important social, economic, and cultural implications. High agricultural productivity enabled
many people to work at tasks other than cultivation: classes of bureaucrats, administrators,
priests, craftsmen, and merchants increased in number as the production and distribution of
food became more efficient. Meanwhile, social extremes became more pronounced: a few
individuals and families amassed enormous wealth, many led simple lives, and some fell into
slavery. Good roads fostered trade within imperial borders, and Persian society itself served
as a commercial and cultural bridge between Indian and Mediterranean societies. As a crossroads, Persia served not only as a link in long-distance trade networks but also as a conduit
for the exchange of philosophical and religious ideas. Persian religious traditions did not attract many adherents beyond the imperial boundaries, but they inspired religious thinkers
subject to Persian rule and deeply influenced Judaism, Christianity, and Islam.

The Rise and Fall of the Persian Empires
The empires of Persia arose in the arid land of Iran. For centuries Iran had developed
under the shadow of the wealthier and more productive Mesopotamia to the west
while absorbing intermittent migrations and invasions of nomadic peoples coming
out of central Asia to the northeast. During the sixth century B.C.E., rulers of the
province of Persia in southwestern Iran embarked on a series of conquests that resulted in the formation of an enormous empire. For more than a millennium, four
ruling dynasties—the Achaemenids (558–330 B.C.E.), the Seleucids (323–83 B.C.E.),
the Parthians (247 B.C.E.–224 C.E.), and the Sasanids (224–651 C.E.)—maintained a
continuous tradition of imperial rule in much of southwest Asia.

The Achaemenid Empire
The Medes and
the Persians

Achaemenid
(ah-KEE-muh-nid)
Medes (meeds)

The origins of classical Persian society trace back to the late stages of Mesopotamian
society. During the centuries before 1000 B.C.E., two closely related peoples known as
the Medes and the Persians migrated from central Asia to Persia (the southwestern
portion of the modern-day state of Iran), where they lived in loose subjection to the
Babylonian and Assyrian empires. The Medes and the Persians spoke Indo-European
languages, and their movements were part of the larger Indo-European migrations.
They shared many cultural traits with their distant cousins, the Aryans, who migrated
into India. They were mostly pastoralists, although they also practiced a limited amount
of agriculture. They organized themselves by clans rather than by states or formal political institutions, but they recognized leaders who collected taxes and delivered tribute to their Mesopotamian overlords.
Though not tightly organized politically, the Medes and the Persians were peoples
of considerable military power. As descendants of nomadic peoples from central Asia,
they possessed the equestrian skills common to many steppe peoples. They were expert archers, even when mounted on their horses, and they frequently raided the
wealthy lands of Mesopotamia. When the Assyrian and Babylonian empires weakened

ben06937.Ch07_156-179.qxd

8/27/07

8:12 AM

Page 161

CHAPTER 7 |

0

1000

AR M E N IA

LY D I A
Ti

n

Ephesus

gr

ean Sea

BA BYLO N IA

HINDU KUSH

is
up

E

rran

Se

IONIA a

ite

hr

at

es

Pasargadae

PE

P

N

ile

ARABIA

si

an

R Persepolis
SI
A

G

In

ul

du

s

f

Re

First Cataract

ea
d S

Achaemenid empire
Seleucid empire
Royal road

Susa
er

EGYPT

S A H A R A D E S E RT

Sea

ea

CE

ed

eg

EE

M

Sardis

S.

an

A

A N AT O L I A

3000 km

A ral
S ea

C
US
MT
N

1500 mi
2000

pi

GR

MA

C E DON IA

161

as

Black Sea

T H R AC E

1000

500

0

CAU
CAS

The Empires of Persia

Arabian Sea

Map 7.1 The Achaemenid and Seleucid empires, 558–83 B.C.E. Compare the size of the Achaemenid empire to the earlier Mesopotamian and
Egyptian empires discussed in chapters 2 and 3. What role did the Royal Road and other highways play in the maintenance of the Achaemenid empire?

in the sixth century B.C.E., the Medes and the Persians embarked on a vastly successful imperial venture of their own.
Cyrus the Achaemenid (reigned 558–530 B.C.E.) launched the Persians’ imperial
venture. In some ways Cyrus was an unlikely candidate for that role. He came from a
mountainous region of southwestern Iran, and in reference to the region’s economy,
his contemporaries often called him Cyrus the Shepherd. Yet Cyrus proved to be a
tough, wily leader and an outstanding military strategist. His conquests laid the foundation of the first Persian empire, also known as the Achaemenid empire because its
rulers claimed descent from Cyrus’s Achaemenid clan.
In 558 B.C.E. Cyrus became king of the Persian tribes, which he ruled from his
mountain fortress at Pasargadae. In 553 B.C.E. he initiated a rebellion against his Median overlord, whom he crushed within three years. By 548 B.C.E. he had brought
all of Iran under his control, and he began to look for opportunities to expand his
influence. In 546 B.C.E. he conquered the powerful kingdom of Lydia in Anatolia
(modern-day Turkey). Between 545 B.C.E. and 539 B.C.E. he campaigned in central
Asia and Bactria (modern Afghanistan). In a swift campaign of 539 B.C.E., he seized
Babylonia, whose vassal states immediately recognized him as their lord. Within twenty
years Cyrus went from minor regional king to ruler of an empire that stretched from
India to the borders of Egypt.
Cyrus no doubt would have mounted a campaign against Egypt, the largest
and wealthiest neighboring state outside his control, had he lived long enough. But in

Cyrus

Cyrus’s Conquests

ben06937.Ch07_156-179.qxd

162

PART II |

Darius

Persepolis

Achaemenid
Administration:
The Satrapies

8/27/07

8:12 AM

Page 162

The Formation of Classical Societies, 500 B.C.E. to 500 C.E.

530 B.C.E. he fell, mortally wounded,
while protecting his northeastern frontier from nomadic raiders. His troops recovered his body and placed it in a simple
tomb, which still stands, that Cyrus had
prepared for himself at his palace in
Pasargadae.
Cyrus’s empire survived and expanded during the reigns of his successors. His son Cambyses (reigned 530–
522 B.C.E.) conquered Egypt in 525
B.C.E. and brought its wealth into Persian hands. The greatest of the Achaemenid emperors, Darius (reigned 521–
The tomb of Cyrus at Pasargadae—one of
486 B.C.E.), a younger kinsman of Cyrus,
the few Achaemenid monuments that have
extended the empire both east and west.
survived to the present.
His armies pushed into northwestern
India as far as the Indus River, absorbing the northern Indian kingdom of Gandhara,
while also capturing Thrace, Macedonia, and the western coast of the Black Sea in
southeastern Europe. By the late sixth century, Darius presided over an empire stretching some 3,000 kilometers (1,865 miles) from the Indus River in the east to the Aegean
Sea in the west and 1,500 kilometers (933 miles) from Armenia in the north to the
first cataract of the Nile River in the south. This empire embraced mountains, valleys,
plateaus, jungles, deserts, and arable land, and it touched the shores of the Arabian
Sea, Aral Sea, Persian Gulf, Caspian Sea, Black Sea, Red Sea, and Mediterranean Sea.
With a population of some thirty-five million, Darius’s realm was by far the largest empire the world had yet seen.
Yet Darius was more important as an administrator than as a conqueror. Governing
a far-flung empire was a much more difficult challenge than conquering it. The
Achaemenid rulers presided over more than seventy distinct ethnic groups, including
peoples who lived in widely scattered regions, spoke many different languages, and observed a profusion of religious and cultural traditions. To maintain their empire, the
Achaemenids needed to establish lines of communication with all parts of their realm
and design institutions that would enable them to tax and administer their territories.
In doing so, they not only made it possible for the Achaemenid empire to survive but
also pioneered administrative techniques that would outlast their dynasty and influence
political life in southwestern Asia for centuries to come.
Soon after his rise to power, Darius began to centralize his administration. About
520 B.C.E. he started to build a new capital of astonishing magnificence at Persepolis,
near Pasargadae. Darius intended Persepolis to serve not only as an administrative center but also as a monument to the Achaemenid dynasty. Structures at Persepolis included vast reception halls, lavish royal residences, and a well-protected treasury. From
the time of Darius to the end of the Achaemenid dynasty in 330 B.C.E., Persepolis served
as the nerve center of the Persian empire—a resplendent capital bustling with advisors,
ministers, diplomats, scribes, accountants, translators, and bureaucratic officers of all descriptions. Even today, massive columns and other ruins bespeak the grandeur of Darius’s capital.
The government of the Achaemenid empire depended on a finely tuned balance
between central initiative and local administration. The Achaemenid rulers made great
claims to authority in their official title—“The Great King, King of Kings, King in
Persia, King of Countries.” Like their Mesopotamian predecessors, the Achaemenids

ben06937.Ch07_156-179.qxd

8/27/07

8:12 AM

Page 163

CHAPTER 7 |

The Empires of Persia

Ruins of Persepolis, showing the imperial reception hall and palaces.

appointed governors to serve as agents of the central administration and oversee affairs in the various regions. Darius divided his realm into twenty-three satrapies—administrative and taxation districts governed by satraps. Yet the Achaemenids did not
try to push direct rule on their subjects: most of the satraps were Persians, but the
Achaemenids recruited local officials to fill almost all administrative posts below the
level of the satrap.
Because the satraps often held posts distant from Persepolis, there was always a
possibility that they might ally with local groups and become independent of
Achaemenid authority or even threaten the empire itself. The Achaemenid rulers relied on two measures to discourage that possibility. First, each satrapy had a contingent of military officers and tax collectors who served as checks on the satraps’ power
and independence. Second, the rulers created a new category of officials—essentially
imperial spies—known as “the eyes and ears of the king.” These agents traveled
throughout the empire with their own military forces conducting surprise audits of
accounts and procedures in the provinces and collecting intelligence reports. The division of provincial responsibilities and the institution of the eyes and ears of the king
helped the Achaemenid rulers maintain control over a vast empire that otherwise
might easily have split into a series of independent regional kingdoms.
Darius also sought to improve administrative efficiency by regularizing tax levies
and standardizing laws. Cyrus and Cambyses had accepted periodic “gifts” of tribute
from subject lands and cities. Though often lavish, the gifts did not provide a consistent and reliable source of income for rulers who needed to finance a large bureaucracy
and army. Darius replaced irregular tribute payments with formal tax levies. He required
each satrapy to pay a set quantity of silver—and in some cases a levy of horses or slaves
as well—deliverable annually to the imperial court. To expedite the payment of taxes,
Darius followed the example of the Lydian rulers and issued standardized coins—a
move that also fostered trade throughout his empire. In an equally important initiative

Taxes, Coins,
and Laws

163

ben06937.Ch07_156-179.qxd

164

PART II |

Roads and
Communications

8/27/07

8:12 AM

Page 164

The Formation of Classical Societies, 500 B.C.E. to 500 C.E.

begun in the year 520 B.C.E., he sought to bring the many legal systems of his empire closer to a single standard. He did not abolish the existing laws of individual
lands or peoples, nor did he impose a uniform law code on his entire empire. But he
directed legal experts to study and codify the laws of his subject peoples, modifying
them when necessary to harmonize them with the legal principles observed in the
empire as a whole.
Alongside their administrative and legal policies, the Achaemenid rulers took other
measures to knit their far-flung realm into a coherent whole. They built good roads
across their realm, notably the so-called Persian Royal Road—parts of it paved with
stone—that stretched about 2,575 kilometers (1,600 miles) from the Aegean port of
Ephesus to Sardis in Anatolia, through Mesopotamia along the Tigris River, to Susa
in Iran, with an extension to Pasargadae and Persepolis. Caravans took some ninety
days to travel this road, lodging at inns along the well-policed route.
The imperial government also organized a courier service and built 111 postal stations at intervals of 40 to 50 kilometers (25 to 30 miles) along the Royal Road. Each
station kept a supply of fresh horses and food rations for couriers, who sometimes traveled at night as well as during daylight hours. Scholars estimate that these couriers were
able to carry urgent messages from one end of the Royal Road to the other in two
weeks’ time. The Greek historian Herodotus spoke highly of these imperial servants,
and even today the United States Postal Service takes his description of their efforts as a
standard for its employees: “Neither snow nor rain nor heat nor gloom of night stays
these couriers from the swift completion of their appointed rounds.” The Achaemenids
also improved existing routes between Mesopotamia and Egypt, and they built new
roads linking Persia with northern India, Mesopotamia, Anatolia, Syria, and Egypt. In
combination, these imperial highways stretched approximately 13,000 kilometers
(8,000 miles). In addition to improving communications, these roads facilitated trade,
which helped to integrate the empire’s various regions into a larger economy.

Decline and Fall of the Achaemenid Empire
The Achaemenid
Commonwealth

qanat (kah-NAHT)

The Achaemenids’ roads and administrative machinery enabled them to govern a
vast empire and extend Persian influences throughout their territories. Persian concepts of law and justice administered by trained imperial officials linked peoples from
the Mediterranean Sea to the Indus River in a larger Persian society. Political stability
made it possible to undertake extensive public works projects such as the construction of qanat (underground canals), which led to enhanced agricultural production
and population growth. Iron metallurgy spread to all parts of the empire, and by the
end of the Achaemenid dynasty, iron tools were common in Persian agricultural communities. Peoples in the various regions of the Achaemenid empire maintained their
ethnic identities, but all participated in a larger Persian commonwealth.
Eventually, however, difficulties between rulers and subject peoples undermined
the integrity of the Achaemenid empire. Cyrus and Darius both consciously pursued
a policy of toleration in administering their vast multicultural empire: they took great
care to respect the values and cultural traditions of the peoples they ruled. In Mesopotamia, for example, they did not portray themselves as Persian conquerors but,
rather, as legitimate Babylonian rulers and representatives of Marduk, the patron
deity of Babylon. Darius also won high praise from Jews in the Achaemenid empire,
since he allowed them to return to Jerusalem and rebuild the temple that Babylonian
conquerors had destroyed in 587 B.C.E.
Darius’s successor, Xerxes (reigned 486–465 B.C.E.), retreated from that policy of
toleration, however, flaunted his Persian identity, and sought to impose his values on

ben06937.Ch07_156-179.qxd

8/27/07

8:12 AM

Page 165

CHAPTER 7 |

The Empires of Persia

Carving from Persepolis showing an enthroned Darius (with his son Xerxes standing behind him)
receiving a high court official, as incense burners perfume the air.

conquered lands. This policy caused enormous ill will, especially in Mesopotamia and
Egypt where peoples with their own cultural traditions resented Xerxes’ pretensions.
Xerxes successfully repressed rebellions against his rule in Mesopotamia and Egypt. Yet
resentment of Persian conquerors continued to fester, and it caused serious problems
for the later Achaemenids as they tried to hold their empire together.
The Achaemenids had an especially difficult time with their ethnic Greek subjects,
and efforts to control the Greeks helped to bring about the collapse of the Achaemenid
empire. Ethnic Greeks inhabited many of the cities in Anatolia—particularly in the region of Ionia on the Aegean coast of western Anatolia—and they maintained close
economic and commercial ties with their cousins in the peninsula of Greece itself. The
Ionian Greeks fell under Persian domination during the reign of Cyrus. They became
restive under Darius’s Persian governors—“tyrants,” the Greeks called them—who
oversaw their affairs. In 500 B.C.E. the Ionian cities rebelled, expelled or executed their
governors, and asserted their independence. Their rebellion launched a series of conflicts that Greeks called the Persian Wars (500–479 B.C.E.).
The conflict between the Ionian Greeks and the Persians expanded considerably
when the cities of peninsular Greece sent fleets to aid their kinsmen in Ionia. Darius
managed to put down the rebellion and reassert Achaemenid authority, but he and his
successors became entangled in a difficult and ultimately destructive effort to extend
their authority to the Greek peninsula. In 490 B.C.E. Darius attempted to forestall future problems by mounting an expedition to conquer the wealthy Greek cities and absorb them into his empire. Though larger and much more powerful than the forces of
the disunited Greek city-states, the Persian army had to contend with long and fragile
lines of supply as well as a hostile environment. After some initial successes the Persians
suffered a rout at the battle of Marathon (490 B.C.E.), and they returned home without achieving their goals. Xerxes sent another expedition ten years later, but within
eighteen months, it too had suffered defeat both on land and at sea and had returned
to Persia.
For almost 150 years the Persian empire continued to spar intermittently with the
Greek cities. The adversaries mounted small expeditions against each other, attacking
individual cities or fleets, but they did not engage in large-scale campaigns. The Greek

The Persian Wars

165

ben06937.Ch07_156-179.qxd

166

PART II |

8/27/07

8:12 AM

Page 166

The Formation of Classical Societies, 500 B.C.E. to 500 C.E.

Alexander of
Macedon

A coin issued by
Alexander with an
image of the
conqueror.

cities were too small and disunited to pose a serious challenge to the enormous Persian empire. Meanwhile, for their part, the later Achaemenids had to concentrate on
the other restive and sometimes rebellious regions of their empire and could not embark on new rounds of expansion.
The standoff ended with the rise of Alexander of Macedon, often called Alexander
the Great (discussed more fully in chapter 10). In 334 B.C.E. Alexander invaded Persia
with an army of some forty-eight thousand tough, battle-hardened Macedonians.
Though far smaller than the Persian army in numbers, the well-disciplined Macedonians carried heavier arms and employed more sophisticated military tactics than their
opponents. As a result, they sliced through the Persian empire, advancing almost at
will and dealing their adversaries a series of devastating defeats. In 331 B.C.E. Alexander shattered Achaemenid forces at the battle of Gaugamela, and within a year the
empire founded by Cyrus the Shepherd had dissolved.
Alexander led his forces into Persepolis, confiscated the wealth stored in the imperial treasury there, paid his respects at the tomb of Cyrus in Pasargadae, and proclaimed himself heir to the Achaemenid rulers. After a brief season of celebration,
Alexander and his forces ignited a blaze—perhaps intentionally—that destroyed
Persepolis. The conflagration was so great that when archaeologists first began to explore the ruins of Persepolis in the eighteenth century, they found layers of ash and
charcoal up to 1 meter (3 feet) deep.
The Achaemenid empire had crumbled, but its legacy was by no means exhausted.
Alexander portrayed himself in Persia and Egypt as a legitimate successor of the
Achaemenids who observed their precedents and deserved their honors. He retained
the Achaemenid administrative structure, and he even confirmed the appointments of
many satraps and other officials. As it happened, Alexander had little time to enjoy his
conquests, because he died in 323 B.C.E. after a brief effort to extend his empire to
India. But the states that succeeded him—the Seleucid, Parthian, and Sasanid empires—
continued to employ a basically Achaemenid structure of imperial administration.

The Seleucid, Parthian, and Sasanid Empires
The Seleucids

The Parthians

Seleucids (sih-LOO-sihds)

After Alexander died, his chief generals fought among themselves and struggled to take
over the conqueror’s realms. In Persia the victor was Seleucus, formerly commander of
an elite guard corps in Alexander’s army, who dominated the territories of the former
Achaemenid empire and ruled them from 305 to 281 B.C.E. Like Alexander, Seleucus
and his successors retained the Achaemenid systems of administration and taxation as
well as the imperial roads and postal service. The Seleucids also founded new cities
throughout the realm and attracted Greek colonists to occupy them. The migrants,
who represented only a small fraction of the whole population of the empire, largely
adapted to their new environment. Nonetheless, the establishment of cities greatly stimulated trade and economic development both within the Seleucid empire and beyond.
As foreigners, the Seleucids faced opposition from native Persians and especially
their ruling classes. Satraps often revolted against Seleucid rule, or at least worked to
build power bases that would enable them to establish their independence. The Seleucids soon lost their holdings in northern India, and the seminomadic Parthians progressively took over Iran during the third century B.C.E. The Seleucids continued to rule a
truncated empire until 83 B.C.E., when Roman conquerors put an end to their empire.
Meanwhile, the Parthians established themselves as lords of a powerful empire
based in Iran that they extended to wealthy Mesopotamia. The Parthians had occupied
the region of eastern Iran around Khurasan since Achaemenid times. They retained
many of the customs and traditions of nomadic peoples from the steppes of central

ben06937.Ch07_156-179.qxd

8/27/07

8:12 AM

Page 167

CHAPTER 7 |

The Empires of Persia

Asia. They did not have a centralized government, for example, but organized themselves politically through a federation of
leaders who met in councils and jointly determined policy for all allied groups. They
were skillful warriors, accustomed to defending themselves against constant threats
from nomadic peoples farther east.
As they settled and turned increasingly to agriculture, the Parthians also devised an effective means to resist nomadic
invasions. Because they had no access to
feed grains, nomadic peoples allowed their
horses to forage for food on the steppes
Gold sculpture of a nomadic horseman
during the winter. The Parthians discovdischarging an arrow. This figurine dates
ered that if they fed their horses on alfalfa
from the fifth or fourth century B.C.E. and
during the winter, their animals would
might well represent a Parthian.
grow much larger and stronger than the
small horses and ponies of the steppes.
Their larger animals could then support
heavily armed warriors outfitted with metal armor, which served as an effective
shield against the arrows of the steppe nomads. Well-trained forces of heavily armed
cavalry could usually put nomadic raiding parties to flight. Indeed, few existing
forces could stand up to Parthian heavy cavalry.
As early as the third century B.C.E., the Parthians began to wrest their independence from the Seleucids. The Parthian satrap revolted against his Seleucid overlord in
238 B.C.E., and during the following decades his successors gradually enlarged their
holdings. Mithradates I, the Parthians’ greatest conqueror, came to the throne about
171 B.C.E. and transformed his state into a mighty empire. By about 155 B.C.E. he had
consolidated his hold on Iran and had also extended Parthian rule to Mesopotamia.
The Parthians portrayed themselves as enemies of the foreign Seleucids, as restorers of rule in the Persian tradition. To some extent that characterization was accurate.
The Parthians largely followed the example of the Achaemenids in structuring their
empire: they governed through satraps, employed Achaemenid techniques of administration and taxation, and built a capital city at Ctesiphon on the Euphrates River
near modern Baghdad. But the Parthians also retained elements of their steppe traditions. They did not develop nearly so centralized a regime as the Achaemenids or the
Seleucids but, rather, vested a great deal of authority and responsibility in their clan
leaders. These men often served as satraps, and they regularly worked to build independent bases of power in their regions. They frequently mounted rebellions against
the imperial government, though without much success.
For about three centuries the Parthians presided over a powerful empire between
India and the Mediterranean. Beginning in the first century C.E., they faced pressure in
the west from the expanding Roman empire. The Parthian empire as a whole never
stood in danger of falling to the Romans, but on three occasions in the second century
C.E. Roman armies captured the Parthian capital at Ctesiphon. Combined with internal difficulties caused by the rebellious satraps, Roman pressure contributed to the
weakening of the Parthian state. During the early third century C.E., internal rebellion
brought it down.
Once again, though, the tradition of imperial rule continued, this time under the
Sasanids, who came from Persia and claimed direct descent from the Achaemenids.

167

Parthian Conquests

Parthian Government

The Sasanids

ben06937.Ch07_156-179.qxd

168

PART II |

8/27/07

8:12 AM

Page 168

The Formation of Classical Societies, 500 B.C.E. to 500 C.E.

The Sasanids toppled the Parthians in 224 C.E. and ruled until 651 C.E., re-creating
much of the splendor of the Achaemenid empire. From their cosmopolitan capital at
Ctesiphon, the Sasanid “king of kings” provided strong rule from Parthia to Mesopotamia while also rebuilding an elaborate system of administration and founding or
refurbishing numerous cities. Sasanid merchants traded actively with peoples to both
east and west, and they introduced into Iran the cultivation of crops such as rice, sugarcane, citrus fruits, eggplant, and cotton that came west over the trade routes from
India and China.
During the reign of Shapur I (239–272 C.E.), the Sasanids stabilized their western
frontier and created a series of buffer states between themselves and the Roman empire. Shapur even defeated several Roman armies and settled the prisoners in Iran,
where they devoted their famous engineering skills to the construction of roads and
dams. After Shapur, the Sasanids did not expand militarily, but entered into a standoff
relationship with the Kushan empire in the east and the Roman and Byzantine empires
in the west. None of those large empires was strong enough to overcome the others,
but they contested border areas and buffer states, sometimes engaging in lengthy and
bitter disputes that sapped the energies of all involved.
These continual conflicts seriously weakened the Sasanid empire in particular. The
empire came to an end in 651 C.E. when Arab warriors killed the last Sasanid ruler,
overran his realm, and incorporated it into their rapidly expanding Islamic empire. Yet
even conquest by external invaders did not end the legacy of classical Persia, since Persian administrative techniques and cultural traditions were so powerful that the Arab
conquerors adopted them to use in building a new Islamic society.

Imperial Society and Economy
Throughout the eastern hemisphere during the classical era, public life and social structure became much more complicated than they had been during the days of the early
complex societies. Centralized imperial governments needed large numbers of administrative officials, which led to the emergence of educated classes of bureaucrats. Stable
empires enabled many individuals to engage in trade or other specialized labor as artisans, craftsmen, or professionals of various kinds. Some of them accumulated vast
wealth, which led to increased distance and tensions between rich and poor. Meanwhile, slavery became more common than in earlier times. The prominence of slavery
had to do partly with the expansion of imperial states, which often enslaved conquered
foes, but it also reflected the increasing gulf between rich and poor, which placed such
great economic pressure on some individuals that they had to give up their freedom in
order to survive. All those developments had implications for the social structures of
classical societies in Persia as well as China, India, and the Mediterranean basin.

Social Development in Classical Persia

Sasanids (suh-SAH-nids)

During the early days of the Achaemenid empire, Persian society reflected its origins
on the steppes of central Asia. When the Medes and the Persians migrated to Iran,
their social structure was similar to that of the Aryans in India, consisting primarily of
warriors, priests, and peasants. For centuries, when they lived on the periphery and in
the shadow of the Mesopotamian empires, the Medes and the Persians maintained
steppe traditions. Even after the establishment of the Achaemenid empire, some of
them followed a seminomadic lifestyle and maintained ties with their cousins on the
steppes. Family and clan relationships were extremely important in the organization of

ben06937.Ch07_156-179.qxd

8/27/07

8:12 AM

Page 169

CHAPTER 7 |

0

1000

500

169

1500 mi
2000

1000

0

3000 km

Aral
Sea

Cas

pi

Black Sea

The Empires of Persia

an

Sea

A R M E N IA
A N ATO LIA
T

ig r

HINDU
KUSH

PA RT H IA

Sea

ph

erranean

Eu

Medit

is

SYR IA
ra

Alexandria

tes

BACTR IA

Ctesiphon
B A BY LO N I A

GA N D H A R A

PE R S IA

Pe

Persepolis

I nd

rs

an

i

E G YPT

us

Gu

lf

Re

Ni

le

ARAB IA

e
dS
a

Parthian empire

A rab i an
S ea

Sasanid empire

Map 7.2 The Parthian and Sasanid empires, 247 B.C.E.–651 C.E. Note the location of the Parthian and Sasanid empires between the Mediterranean Sea
and northern India. What roles did these two empires play in facilitating or hindering communications between lands to their east and west?

Persian political and social affairs. Male warriors headed the clans, which retained much
of their influence long after the establishment of the Achaemenid empire.
The development of a cosmopolitan empire, however, brought considerable complexity to Persian society. The requirements of imperial administration, for example,
called for a new class of educated bureaucrats who to a large extent undermined the
position of the old warrior elite. The bureaucrats did not directly challenge the patriarchal warriors and certainly did not seek to displace them from their privileged position
in society. Nevertheless, the bureaucrats’ crucial role in running the day-to-day affairs
of the empire guaranteed them a prominent and comfortable place in Persian society.
By the time of the later Achaemenids and the Seleucids, Persian cities were home to
masses of administrators, tax collectors, and record keepers. The bureaucracy even included a substantial corps of translators, who facilitated communications among the
empire’s many linguistic groups. Imperial survival depended on these literate professionals, and high-ranking bureaucrats came to share power and influence with warriors
and clan leaders.
The bulk of Persian society consisted of individuals who were free but did not enjoy
the privileges of clan leaders and important bureaucrats. In the cities the free classes included artisans, craftsmen, merchants, and low-ranking civil servants. Priests and priestesses were also prominent urban residents, along with servants who maintained the
temple communities in which they lived. In Persian society, as in earlier Mesopotamian
societies, members of the free classes participated in religious observances conducted at

Imperial Bureaucrats

Free Classes

ben06937.Ch07_156-179.qxd

170

PART II |

8/27/07

8:12 AM

Page 170

The Formation of Classical Societies, 500 B.C.E. to 500 C.E.

In this sculpture from Persepolis, Persian nobles dressed in fine cloaks and hats ascend the
staircase leading to the imperial reception hall.

Slaves

local temples, and they had the right to share in the income that temples generated
from their agricultural operations and from craft industries such as textile production
that the temples organized. The weaving of textiles was mostly the work of women,
who received rations of grain, wine, beer, and sometimes meat from the imperial and
temple workshops that employed them.
In the countryside the free classes included peasants who owned land as well as
landless cultivators who worked as laborers or tenants on properties owned by the
state, temple communities, or other individuals. Free residents of rural areas had the
right to marry and move as they wished, and they could seek better opportunities in
the cities or in military service. Because the Persian empires embraced a great deal of
parched land that received little rainfall, work in the countryside involved not only
cultivation but also the building and maintenance of irrigation systems.
The most remarkable of those systems were underground canals known as qanat,
which allowed cultivators to distribute water to fields without losing large quantities to
evaporation through exposure to the sun and open air. Numerous qanat crisscrossed
the Iranian plateau in the heartland of the Persian empire, where extreme scarcity of
water justified the enormous investment of human labor required to build the canals.
Although they had help from slaves, free residents of the countryside contributed much
of the labor that went into the excavation and maintenance of the qanat.
A large class of slaves also worked in both the cities and the countryside. Individuals passed into slavery by two main routes. Most were prisoners of war who became
slaves as the price of survival. These prisoners usually came from military units, but
the Persians also enslaved civilians who resisted their advance or who rebelled against
imperial authorities. Other slaves came from the ranks of free subjects who accumulated debts that they could not satisfy. In the cities, for example, merchants, artisans,
and craftsmen borrowed funds to purchase goods or open shops, and in the country-

ben06937.Ch07_156-179.qxd

8/27/07

8:12 AM

Page 171

CHAPTER 7 |

The Empires of Persia

171

side small farmers facing competition from large-scale cultivators borrowed against
their property and liberty to purchase tools, seed, or food. Failure to repay those
debts in a timely fashion often forced the borrowers not only to forfeit their property
but also to sell their children, their spouses, or themselves into slavery.
Slave status deprived individuals of their personal freedom. Slaves became the
property of an individual, the state, or an institution such as a temple community:
they worked at tasks set by their owners, and they could not move or marry at will,
although existing family units usually stayed together. Most slaves probably worked
as domestic servants or skilled laborers in the households of the wealthy, but at least
some slaves cultivated their owners’ fields in the countryside. State-owned slaves provided much of the manual labor for large-scale construction projects such as roads,
irrigation systems, city walls, and palaces.
In Mesopotamia, temple communities owned many slaves who worked at agricultural tasks and performed administrative chores for their priestly masters. During
the mid- to late sixth century B.C.E., a slave named Gimillu served the temple community of Eanna in Uruk, and his career is relatively well-known because records of
his various misadventures survive in archives. Gimillu appeared in numerous legal
cases because he habitually defrauded his masters, pocketed bribes, and embezzled
temple funds. Yet he held a high position in the temple community and always managed to escape serious punishment. His career reveals that slaves sometimes had administrative talents and took on tasks involving considerable responsibility. Gimillu’s
case clearly shows that slaves sometimes enjoyed close relationships with powerful individuals who could protect them from potential enemies.

Economic Foundations of Classical Persia
Agriculture was the economic foundation of classical Persian society. Like other classical societies, Persia needed large agricultural surpluses to support military forces and
administrative specialists as well as residents of cities who were artisans, crafts workers,
and merchants rather than cultivators. The Persian empires embraced several regions of
exceptional fertility—notably Mesopotamia, Egypt, Anatolia, and northern India—and
they prospered by mobilizing the agricultural surpluses of those lands.
Barley and wheat were the grains cultivated most commonly in the Persian empires.
Peas, lentils, mustard, garlic, onions, cucumbers, dates, apples, pomegranates, pears,
and apricots supplemented the cereals in diets throughout Persian society, and beer and
wine were the most common beverages. In most years agricultural production far exceeded the needs of cultivators, making sizable surpluses available for sale in the cities or
for distribution to state servants through the imperial bureaucracy. Vast quantities of
produce flowed into the imperial court from state-owned lands cultivated by slaves or
leased out to tenants in exchange for a portion of the annual harvest. Even though
they are incomplete, surviving records show that, for example, in 500 B.C.E., during the
middle period of Darius’s reign, the imperial court received almost eight hundred thousand liters of grain, quite apart from vegetables, fruits, meat, poultry, fish, oil, beer,
wine, and textiles. Officials distributed some of that produce to the imperial staff as
wages in kind, but much of it also found its way into the enormous banquets that Darius organized for as many as ten thousand guests. Satraps and other high officials lived
on a less lavish scale than the Persian emperors but also benefited from agricultural surpluses delivered to their courts from their own lands.
Agriculture was the economic foundation of the Persian empires, but the empires
had the effect of encouraging rapid economic development and trade. By ensuring political stability and maintaining an elaborate network of roads, Achaemenid rulers laid

Agricultural
Production

Standardized Coins

ben06937.Ch07_156-179.qxd

172

PART II |

8/27/07

8:12 AM

Page 172

The Formation of Classical Societies, 500 B.C.E. to 500 C.E.

Tribute bearers from lands subject to Achaemenid rule bring rams, horses, and fabrics to the
imperial court at Persepolis.

Trade

solid foundations for economic prosperity and secure transportation of trade goods.
Trade benefited also from the invention of standardized coins, which first appeared in
the Anatolian kingdom of Lydia. Beginning about 640 B.C.E. the kings of Lydia issued
coins of precisely measured metal and guaranteed their value. It was much simpler for
merchants to exchange standardized coins than to weigh ingots or bullion when transacting their business. As a result, standardized coins quickly became popular and drew
merchants from distant lands to Lydian markets. When Cyrus defeated the forces of
King Croesus and absorbed Lydia into his expanding realm, he brought the advantages of standardized coins to the larger Achaemenid empire. Markets opened in all
the larger cities of the empire, and the largest cities, such as Babylon, also were home
to banks and companies that invested in commercial ventures.
Long-distance trade grew rapidly during the course of the Persian empires and
linked lands from India to Egypt in a vast commercial zone. Trade traveled both over
land routes, including newly constructed highways such as the Persian Royal Road,
and over sea lanes through the Red Sea, the Persian Gulf, and the Arabian Sea. The
various regions of the Persian empires all contributed particular products to the larger
imperial economy. India supplied gold, ivory, and aromatics. Iran and central Asia provided lapis lazuli, turquoise, and other semiprecious stones. Mesopotamia and Iran
were sources of finished products such as textiles, mirrors, and jewelry. Anatolia supplied gold, silver, iron, copper, and tin. Phoenicia contributed glass, cedar, timber, and
richly dyed woolen fabrics. Spices and aromatics came from Arabia. Egypt provided
grain, linen textiles, and papyrus writing materials as well as gold, ebony, and ivory obtained from Nubia. Greek oil, wine, and ceramics also made their way throughout the
empire and even beyond its borders.
Long-distance trade became especially prominent during the reigns of Alexander
of Macedon and his Seleucid successors. The cities they established and the colonists

ben06937.Ch07_156-179.qxd

8/27/07

8:12 AM

Page 173

CHAPTER 7 |

The Empires of Persia

they attracted stimulated trade throughout the whole region from the Mediterranean
to northern India. Indeed, Greek migrants facilitated cultural as well as commercial
exchanges by encouraging the mixing and mingling of religious faiths, art styles, and
philosophical speculation throughout the Persian realm.

Religions of Salvation
in Classical Persian Society
Cross-cultural influences were especially noticeable in the development of Persian religion. Persians came from the family of peoples who spoke Indo-European languages,
and their earliest religion closely resembled that of the Aryans of India. During the
classical era, however, the new faith of Zoroastrianism emerged and became widely
popular in Iran and to a lesser extent also in the larger Persian empires. Zoroastrianism
reflected the cosmopolitan society of the empires, and it profoundly influenced the beliefs and values of Judaism, Christianity, and Islam. During the late centuries of the
classical era, from about 100 to 500 C.E., three missionary religions—Buddhism, Christianity, and Manichaeism—also found numerous converts in the Persian empire.

Zarathustra and His Faith
The earliest Persian religion centered on cults that celebrated outstanding natural elements and geographic features such as the sun, the moon, water, and especially fire.
Persians recognized many of the same gods as the ancient Aryans, and their priests performed sacrifices similar to those conducted by the brahmins in India. The priests even
made ceremonial use of a hallucinogenic agent called haoma in the same way that the
Aryans used soma, and indeed the two concoctions were probably the same substance.
Like the Aryans, the ancient Persians glorified strength and martial virtues, and the
cults of both peoples sought principally to bring about a comfortable material existence for their practitioners.
During the classical era Persian religion underwent considerable change, as moral
and religious thinkers sought to adapt their messages to the circumstances of a complex, cosmopolitan society. One result was the emergence of Zoroastrianism, which
emerged from the teachings of Zarathustra. Though Zarathustra was undoubtedly a
historical person and the subject of many early stories, little certain information survives about his life and career. It is not even clear exactly when he lived: most scholars date his life to the late seventh and early sixth centuries B.C.E., but some believe
he flourished sometime between 1200 and 1000 B.C.E. He came from an aristocratic
family, and he probably was a priest who became disenchanted with the traditional
religion and its concentration on bloody sacrifices and mechanical rituals. In any
case, when he was about twenty years old, Zarathustra left his family and home in
search of wisdom. After about ten years of travel, he experienced a series of visions
and became convinced that the supreme god, whom he called Ahura Mazda (the
“wise lord”), had chosen him to serve as his prophet and spread his message.
Like his life, Zarathustra’s doctrine has also proven to be somewhat elusive for
modern analysts. Many of the earliest Zoroastrian teachings have perished, because
the priests, known as magi, at first transmitted them orally. Only during the Seleucid
dynasty did magi begin to preserve religious texts in writing, and only under the
Sasanids did they compile their scriptures in a holy book known as the Avesta. Nevertheless, many of Zarathustra’s compositions survive, since magi preserved them with
special diligence through oral transmission. Known as the Gathas, Zarathustra’s works

Zarathustra

The Gathas

173

ben06937.Ch07_156-179.qxd

174

PART II |

Zoroastrian
Teachings

Popularity of
Zoroastrianism

8/27/07

8:12 AM

Page 174

The Formation of Classical Societies, 500 B.C.E. to 500 C.E.

were hymns that he composed in honor
of the various deities that he recognized.
Apart from the Gathas, ancient Zoroastrian literature included a wide variety of
hymns, liturgical works, and treatises on
moral and theological themes. Though
some of these works survive, the arrival of
Islam in the seventh century C.E. and the
subsequent decline of Zoroastrianism resulted in the loss of most of the Avesta
and later Zoroastrian works.
Zarathustra and his followers were
not strict monotheists. They recognized
Ahura Mazda as a supreme deity, an eterA gold clasp or button of the fifth century
nal and beneficent spirit, and the creator
B.C.E. with the symbol of Ahura Mazda
of all good things. But Zarathustra also
as a winged god.
spoke of six lesser deities, whom he praised
in the Gathas. Furthermore, he believed
that Ahura Mazda engaged in a cosmic conflict with an independent adversary, an
evil and malign spirit known as Angra Mainyu (the “destructive spirit” or the “hostile spirit”). Following a struggle of some twelve thousand years, Zarathustra believed, Ahura Mazda and the forces of good would ultimately prevail, and Angra
Mainyu and the principle of evil would disappear forever. At that time individual
human souls would undergo judgment and would experience rewards or punishments according to the holiness of their thoughts, words, and deeds. Honest and
moral individuals would enter into a heavenly paradise, whereas demons would fling
their evil brethren into a hellish realm of pain and suffering.
Zarathustra did not call for ascetic renunciation of the world in favor of a future
heavenly existence. To the contrary, he considered the material world a blessing that
reflected the benevolent nature of Ahura Mazda. His moral teachings allowed human
beings to enjoy the world and its fruits—including wealth, sexual pleasure, and social
prestige—as long as they did so in moderation and behaved honestly toward others.
Zoroastrians have often summarized their moral teachings in the simple formula
“good words, good thoughts, good deeds.”
Zarathustra’s teachings began to attract large numbers of followers during the
sixth century B.C.E., particularly among Persian aristocrats and ruling elites. Wealthy
patrons donated land and established endowments for the support of Zoroastrian
temples. The Achaemenid era saw the emergence of a sizable priesthood, whose members conducted religious rituals, maintained a calendar, taught Zoroastrian values, and
preserved Zoroastrian doctrine through oral transmission.
Cyrus and Cambyses probably observed Zoroastrian rites, although little evidence
survives to illustrate their religious preferences. Beginning with Darius, however, the
Achaemenid emperors closely associated themselves with Ahura Mazda and claimed divine sanction for their rule. Darius ordered stone inscriptions celebrating his achievements, and in those monuments he clearly revealed his devotion to Ahura Mazda and
his opposition to the principle of evil. He did not attempt to suppress other gods or religions, but tolerated the established faiths of the various peoples in his empire. Yet he
personally regarded Ahura Mazda as a deity superior to all others.
In one of his inscriptions, Darius praised Ahura Mazda as the great god who created the earth, the sky, and humanity and who moreover elevated Darius himself to
the imperial honor. With the aid of imperial sponsorship, Zoroastrian temples cropped

ben06937.Ch07_156-179.qxd

8/27/07

8:12 AM

Page 175

CHAPTER 7 |

The Empires of Persia

175

Sources from the Past
Zarathustra on Good and Evil
Like many other religious faiths of classical times, Zoroastrianism encouraged the faithful to observe high moral and
ethical standards. In this hymn from the Gathas, Zarathustra relates how Ahura Mazda and Angra Mainyu—
representatives of good and evil, respectively—made choices about how to behave based on their fundamental natures.
Human beings did likewise, according to Zarathustra, and ultimately all would experience the rewards and the
punishments that their choices merited.
In the beginning, there were two Primal Spirits, Twins
spontaneously active;
These are the Good and the Evil, in thought, and in
word, and in deed:
Between these two, let the wise choose aright;
Be good, not base.
And when these Twin Spirits came together at first,
They established Life and Non-Life,
And so shall it be as long as the world shall last;
The worst existence shall be the lot of the followers
of evil,
And the Good Mind shall be the reward of the
followers of good.
Of these Twin Spirits, the Evil One chose to do the
worst;
While the bountiful Holy Spirit of Goodness,
Clothing itself with the mossy heavens for a garment,
chose the Truth;
And so will those who [seek to] please Ahura Mazda
with righteous deeds, performed with faith in
Truth. . . .

Then at Thy command shall the Good Mind establish
the Kingdom of Heaven, O Mazda,
For those who will deliver Untruth into the hands of
Righteousness and Truth.
Then truly cometh the blow of destruction on
Untruth,
And all those of good fame are garnered up in the Fair
Abode,
The Fair Abode of the Good Mind, the Wise Lord,
and of Truth!
O ye mortals, mark these commandments—
The commandments which the Wise Lord has given,
for Happiness and for Pain;
Long punishment for the evil-doer, and bliss for the
follower of Truth,
The joy of salvation for the Righteous ever afterwards!
FOR FURTHER REFLECTION

What assumptions does Zarathustra make about human
nature and the capacity of human beings to make morally
good choices through free will?

And when there cometh Divine Retribution for the
Evil One,
SOURCE:

D. J. Irani. The Divine Songs of Zarathustra. London: George Allen & Unwin, 1924.

up throughout the Achaemenid realm. The faith was most popular in Iran, but it attracted sizable followings also in Mesopotamia, Anatolia, Egypt, and other parts of
the Achaemenid empire even though there was no organized effort to spread it beyond its original homeland.

Religions of Salvation in a Cosmopolitan Society
The arrival of Alexander of Macedon inaugurated a difficult era for the Zoroastrian
community. During his Persian campaign, Alexander’s forces burned many temples
and killed numerous magi. Because at that time the magi still transmitted Zoroastrian
doctrines orally, an untold number of hymns and holy verses disappeared. The Zoroastrian faith survived, however, and the Parthians cultivated it to rally support against the

ben06937.Ch07_156-179.qxd

176

PART II |

8/27/07

8:12 AM

Page 176

The Formation of Classical Societies, 500 B.C.E. to 500 C.E.

Darius faces Ahura Mazda, to whom he attributed his authority, as the various kings subject to him
acknowledge him as their lord.

Officially Sponsored
Zoroastrianism

Other Faiths

Manichaeism (man-ihKEE-iz'm)

Seleucids. Once established in power, the Parthians observed Zoroastrian rituals,
though they did not support the faith as enthusiastically as their predecessors had done.
During the Sasanid dynasty, however, Zoroastrianism experienced a revival. As selfproclaimed heirs to the Achaemenids, the Sasanids identified closely with Zoroastrianism and supported it zealously. Indeed, the Sasanids often persecuted other faiths if
they seemed likely to become popular enough to challenge the supremacy of Zoroastrianism. With generous imperial backing, the Zoroastrian faith and the magi flourished as never before. Theologians prepared written versions of the holy texts and
collected them in the Avesta. They also explored points of doctrine and addressed difficult questions of morality and theology. Most people probably did not understand
the theologians’ reflections, but they flocked to Zoroastrian temples where they prayed
to Ahura Mazda and participated in rituals.
The Zoroastrian faith faced severe difficulties in the seventh century C.E. when
Islamic conquerors toppled the Sasanid empire. The conquerors did not outlaw the
religion altogether, but they placed political and financial pressure on the magi and
Zoroastrian temples. Some Zoroastrians fled their homeland and found refuge in
India, where their descendants, known as Parsis (“Persians”), continue even today to
observe Zoroastrian traditions. But most Zoroastrians remained in Iran and eventually converted to Islam. As a result, Zoroastrian numbers progressively dwindled.
Only a few thousand faithful maintain a Zoroastrian community in modern-day Iran.
Meanwhile, even though Zoroastrianism ultimately declined in its homeland, the
cosmopolitan character of the Persian realm offered it opportunities to influence other
religious faiths. Numerous Jewish communities had become established in Mesopotamia, Anatolia, and Persia after the Hebrew kingdom of David and Solomon fell in
930 B.C.E. During the Seleucid, Parthian, and Sasanid eras, the Persian empire attracted
merchants, emissaries, and missionaries from the whole region between the Mediterranean and India. Three religions of salvation—Buddhism, Christianity, and Manichaeism, all discussed in later chapters—found a footing alongside Judaism and attracted
converts. Indeed, Christianity and Manichaeism became extremely popular faiths in
spite of intermittent rounds of persecution organized by Sasanid authorities.

ben06937.Ch07_156-179.qxd

8/27/07

8:12 AM

Page 177

CHAPTER 7 |

The Empires of Persia

While foreign faiths influenced religious developments in classical Persian society,
Zoroastrianism also left its mark on the other religions of salvation. Jews living in
Persia during Achaemenid times adopted several specific teachings of Zoroastrianism, which later found their way into the faiths of Christianity and Islam as well.
Those teachings included the notion that an omnipotent and beneficent deity was
responsible for all creation, the idea that a purely evil being worked against the creator god, the conviction that the forces of good will ultimately prevail over the power
of evil after a climactic struggle, the belief that human beings must strive to observe
the highest moral standards, and the doctrine that individuals will undergo judgment, after which the morally upright will experience rewards in paradise while
evildoers will suffer punishments in hell. Those teachings, which have profoundly influenced Judaism, Christianity, and Islam, all derived ultimately from the faith of
Zarathustra and his followers.

T

he Achaemenid empire inaugurated a new era of world history. The Achaemenids
borrowed military and administrative techniques devised earlier by Babylonian and

Assyrian rulers, but they applied those techniques on a much larger scale than did any of
their Mesopotamian predecessors. In doing so they conquered a vast empire and then
governed its diverse lands and peoples with tolerable success for more than two centuries. The Achaemenids demonstrated how it was possible to build and maintain a vast
imperial state, and their example inspired later efforts to establish similar large-scale
imperial states based in Persia and other Eurasian lands as well. The Achaemenid and
later Persian empires integrated much of the territory from the Mediterranean Sea to
the Indus River into a commonwealth in which peoples of different regions and ethnic
groups participated in a larger economy and society. By sponsoring regular and systematic interactions between peoples of different communities, the Persian empires wielded
tremendous cultural as well as political, social, and economic influence. Indeed, Persian
religious beliefs helped to shape moral and religious thought throughout much of southwest Asia and the Mediterranean basin. Zoroastrian teachings were particularly influential: although Zoroastrianism declined after the Sasanid dynasty, its doctrines decisively
influenced the fundamental teachings of Judaism, Christianity, and Islam.

Influence of
Zoroastrianism

177

ben06937.Ch07_156-179.qxd

178

PART II |

8/27/07

8:12 AM

Page 178

The Formation of Classical Societies, 500 B.C.E. to 500 C.E.

C H R O N O L O G Y
7th–6th centuries B.C.E.(?)

Life of Zarathustra

558–330 B.C.E.

Achaemenid dynasty

558–530 B.C.E.

Reign of Cyrus the Achaemenid

521–486 B.C.E.

Reign of Darius

334–330 B.C.E.

Invasion and conquest of the Achaemenid empire by Alexander of Macedon

323–83 B.C.E.

Seleucid dynasty

247 B.C.E.–224 C.E.

Parthian dynasty

224–651 C.E.

Sasanid dynasty

F O R

F U R T H E R

R E A D I N G

Lindsay Allen. The Persian Empire. Chicago, 2005. A valuable
survey of the Achaemenid empire with special attention to
archaeological discoveries.
Mary Boyce, ed. Textual Sources for the Study of Zoroastrianism.
Totowa, N.J., 1984. Sources in translation with numerous
explanatory comments by the author.
———. Zoroastrians: Their Religious Beliefs and Practices. London, 1979. A survey of Zoroastrian history by a leading revisionist scholar.
Maria Brosius. Women in Ancient Persia, 559–331 B.C. Oxford,
1996. Carefully examines both Persian and Greek sources for
information about women and their role in Achaemenid
society.
John Curtis and Nigel Tallis, eds. Forgotten Empire: The World of
Ancient Persia. Berkeley, 2005. A lavisly illustrated collection
of essays by experts on various aspects of the Achaemenid
empire.
Muhammad A. Dandamaev and Vladimir G. Lukonin. The Culture and Social Institutions of Ancient Iran. Ed. by P. L. Kohl.
Cambridge, 1989. Scholarly account that brings the results
of Russian research to bear on the Achaemenid empire.
Jacques Duchesne-Guillemin. The Hymns of Zarathustra. London, 1952. A translation and commentary of Zarathustra’s
most important Gathas.
Richard C. Foltz. Spirituality in the Land of the Noble: How Iran
Shaped the World’s Religions. Oxford, 2004. Includes an accessible discussion of the Zoroastrian faith.

Richard N. Frye. The Heritage of Central Asia: From Antiquity to
the Turkish Expansion. Princeton, 1996. Briefly sketches the
history of various Iranian-speaking peoples in the steppes of
central Asia as well as on the Iranian plateau.
———. The Heritage of Persia. Cleveland, 1963. A leading
scholar’s solid survey of Persia up to the Islamic conquest.
William W. Malandra. An Introduction to Ancient Iranian Religion. Minneapolis, 1983. Careful study of Zoroastrian textual sources.
Susan Sherwin-White and Amélie Kuhrt. From Samarkhand to
Sardis: A New Approach to the Seleucid Empire. Berkeley,
1993. Detailed scholarly analysis of the Seleucid empire concentrating on political and economic matters.
Mark van de Mieroop. A History of the Ancient Near East, ca.
3000–323 B.C. Oxford, 2004. A concise and readable history
that concludes with the Achaemenid empire.
Mortimer Wheeler. Flames over Persepolis. New York, 1968. Deals
with Alexander’s conquest of the Achaemenid empire and especially the spread of Greek art styles throughout the Persian
empire.
Robert C. Zaehner. The Dawn and Twilight of Zoroastrianism.
London, 1961. An important interpretation of Zoroastrianism that concentrates on the Achaemenid and Sasanid periods.
———, ed. The Teachings of the Magi: A Compendium of Zoroastrian Beliefs. London, 1956. Translations of texts by later
Zoroastrian theologians.

ben06937.Ch07_156-179.qxd

8/27/07

8:12 AM

Page 179


