Classical China

Page 181

In Search of Political and Social Order

From Economic Prosperity to Social Disorder

Confucius and His School
Daoism
Legalism

Productivity and Prosperity during the Former Han
Economic and Social Difficulties
The Later Han Dynasty

The Unification of China
The Qin Dynasty
The Early Han Dynasty

In the year 99 B.C.E., Chinese imperial officials sentenced the historian Sima Qian to punishment by castration. For just over a decade Sima Qian had worked on a project that he had
inherited from his father, a history of China from earliest times to his own day. This project
brought Sima Qian high prominence at the imperial court. When he spoke in defense of a
dishonored general, his views attracted widespread attention. The emperor reacted furiously
when he learned that Sima Qian had publicly expressed opinions that contradicted the ruler’s
judgment and ordered the historian to undergo his humiliating punishment.
Human castration was by no means uncommon in premodern times. Thousands of boys
and young men of undistinguished birth underwent voluntary castration in China and many
other lands as well in order to pursue careers as eunuchs. Ruling elites often appointed eunuchs, rather than nobles, to sensitive posts because eunuchs did not sire families and so could
not build power bases to challenge established authorities. As personal servants of ruling elites,
eunuchs sometimes came to wield enormous power because of their influence with rulers and
their families.
Exemplary punishment was not an appealing alternative, however, to educated elites
and other prominent individuals: when sentenced to punitive castration, Chinese men of
honor normally avoided the penalty by taking their own lives. Yet Sima Qian chose to endure
his punishment. In a letter to a friend he explained that an early death by suicide would mean
that a work that only he was capable of producing would go forever unwritten. To transmit
his understanding of the Chinese past, then, Sima Qian opted to live and work in disgrace
until his death about 90 B.C.E.
During his last years Sima Qian completed a massive work consisting of 130 chapters,
most of which survive. He consulted court documents and the historical works of his predecessors, and when writing about his own age he supplemented those sources with personal
observations and information gleaned from political and military figures who played leading
roles in Chinese society. He composed historical accounts of the emperors’ reigns and biographical sketches of notable figures, including ministers, statesmen, generals, empresses,
aristocrats, scholars, officials, merchants, and rebels. He even described the societies of neighboring peoples with whom Chinese sometimes conducted trade and sometimes made war.
The work of the disgraced but conscientious scholar Sima Qian provides the best information
available about the development of early imperial China.
A rich body of political and social thought prepared the way for the unification of China
under the Qin and Han dynasties. Confucians, Daoists, Legalists, and others formed schools

OPPOSITE:

An eighteenth-century painting depicts the Han emperor discussing classical texts
with Confucian scholars.

eunuchs (YOO-nihks)

181

ben06937.Ch08_180-205.qxd

182

PART II |

8/2/07

4:34 PM

Page 182

The Formation of Classical Societies, 500 B.C.E. to 500 C.E.
of thought and worked to bring political and social stability to China during the chaotic years
of the late Zhou dynasty and the Period of the Warring States. Legalist ideas contributed directly to unification by outlining means by which rulers could strengthen their states. The
works of the Confucians and the Daoists did not lend themselves so readily to the unification
process, but both schools of thought survived and profoundly influenced Chinese political
and cultural traditions.
Rulers of the Qin and Han dynasties adopted Legalist principles and imposed centralized
imperial rule on all of China. Like the Achaemenids of Persia, the Qin and Han emperors ruled
through an elaborate bureaucracy, and they built roads that linked the various regions of
China. They went further than the Persian emperors in their efforts to foster cultural unity in
their realm. They imposed a common written language throughout China and established an
educational system based on Confucian thought and values. For almost 450 years the Qin
and Han dynasties guided the fortunes of China and established a strong precedent for centralized imperial rule.
Especially during the Han dynasty, political stability was the foundation of economic prosperity. High agricultural productivity supported the development of iron and silk industries,
and Chinese goods found markets in central Asia, India, the Persian empire, and even the
Mediterranean basin. In spite of economic prosperity, however, later Han society experienced
deep divisions between the small class of extremely wealthy landowners and the masses of
landless poor. Those divisions eventually led to civil disorder and the emergence of political
factions, which ultimately brought the Han dynasty to an end.

In Search of Political and Social Order
The late centuries of the Zhou dynasty brought political confusion to China and led
eventually to the chaos associated with the Period of the Warring States (403–221
B.C.E.). During those same centuries, however, there also took place a remarkable
cultural flowering that left a permanent mark on Chinese history. In a way, political
turmoil helps to explain the cultural creativity of the late Zhou dynasty and the Period of the Warring States because it forced thoughtful people to reflect on the nature of society and the proper roles of human beings in society. Some sought to
identify principles that would restore political and social order. Others concerned
themselves with a search for individual tranquility apart from society. Three schools
of thought that emerged during those centuries of confusion and chaos—Confucianism, Daoism, and Legalism—exercised a particularly deep influence on Chinese political and cultural traditions.

Confucius and His School
Confucius

The first Chinese thinker who addressed the problem of political and social order in a
straightforward and self-conscious way was Kong Fuzi (551– 479 B.C.E.)—“Master
Philosopher Kong,” as his disciples called him, or Confucius, as he is known in English. He came from an aristocratic family in the state of Lu in northern China, and for
many years he sought an influential post at the Lu court. But Confucius was a strongwilled man who often did not get along well with others. He could be quite cantankerous: he was known to lodge bitter complaints, for example, if someone undercooked
or overcooked his rice. Not surprisingly, then, he refused to compromise his beliefs in
the interest of political expediency, and he insisted on observing principles that frequently clashed with state policy. When he realized that he would never obtain any-

ben06937.Ch08_180-205.qxd

8/2/07

4:34 PM

Page 183

CHAPTER 8 |

The Unification of China

thing more than a minor post in Lu,
Confucius left in search of a more
prestigious appointment elsewhere.
For about ten years he traveled to
courts throughout northern China,
but he found none willing to accept
his services. In 484 B.C.E., bitterly disappointed, he returned to Lu, where
he died five years later.
Confucius never realized his ambition to become a powerful minister. Throughout his career, however,
he served as an educator as well as a
political advisor, and in that capacity
he left an enduring mark on Chinese
society. He attracted numerous disciples who aspired to political careers.
Some of his pupils compiled the master’s sayings and teachings in a book
known as the Analects, a work that
has profoundly influenced Chinese
political and cultural traditions.
Confucius’s thought was fundamentally moral, ethical, and political
in character. It was also thoroughly
No contemporary portrait of Confucius survives,
practical: Confucius did not address
but artists have used their imaginations and
abstruse philosophical questions, bedepicted him in many ways over the years.
cause he thought they would not
This portrait of 1735 identifies Confucius as
help to solve the political and social
“the Sage and Teacher” and represents him in
problems of his day. Nor did he deal
the distinctive dress of an eighteenth-century
Confucian scholar-bureaucrat.
with religious questions, because he
thought they went beyond the capacity of mortal human intelligence. He did not even concern himself much with the
structure of the state, because he thought political and social harmony arose from
the proper ordering of human relationships rather than the establishment of state offices. In an age when bureaucratic institutions were not yet well developed, Confucius believed that the best way to promote good government was to fill official
positions with individuals who were both well educated and extraordinarily conscientious. Thus Confucius concentrated on the formation of what he called junzi—
“superior individuals”—who took a broad view of public affairs and did not allow
personal interests to influence their judgments.
In the absence of an established educational system and a formal curriculum,
Confucius had his disciples study works of poetry and history produced during the
Zhou dynasty, since he believed that they provided excellent insight into human nature. He carefully examined the Book of Songs, the Book of History, the Book of Rites,
and other works with his students, concentrating especially on their practical value
for prospective administrators. As a result of Confucius’s influence, literary works of
the Zhou dynasty became the core texts of the traditional Chinese education. For
more than two thousand years, until the early twentieth century C.E., talented Chinese seeking government posts proceeded through a cycle of studies deriving from
the one developed by Confucius in the fifth century B.C.E.

Confucian Ideas

183

ben06937.Ch08_180-205.qxd

184

PART II |

8/2/07

4:34 PM

Page 184

The Formation of Classical Societies, 500 B.C.E. to 500 C.E.

Sources from the Past
Confucius on Good Government
Confucius never composed formal writings, but his disciples collected his often pithy remarks into a work known as the
Analects (“sayings”). Referred to as “the Master” in the following excerpts from the Analects, Confucius consistently
argued that only good men possessing moral authority could rule effectively.
The Master said, “He who exercises government by
means of his virtue may be compared to the north
polar star, which keeps its place, while all the stars turn
toward it. . . .”
The Master said, “If the people be led by laws, and
uniformity be imposed on them by punishments, they
will try to avoid the punishment, but will have no sense
of shame.
“If they be led by virtue, and uniformity be provided
for them by the rules of propriety, they will have the
sense of shame, and moreover will become good. . . .”
The duke Ai asked, saying, “What should be done
in order to secure the submission of the people?” Confucius replied, “Advance the upright and set aside the
crooked, and then the people will submit. Advance the
crooked and set aside the upright, and then the people
will not submit.”
Ji Kang asked how to cause the people to reverence
their ruler, to be faithful to him, and to go on to seek
virtue. The Master said, “Let him preside over them
with gravity; then they will reverence him. Let him be
filial and kind to all; then they will be faithful to him.
Let him advance the good and teach the incompetent;
then they will eagerly seek to be virtuous. . . .”
Zigong asked about government. The Master said,
“The requisites of government are that there be sufficiency of food, sufficiency of military equipment, and
the confidence of the people in their ruler.”

Zigong said, “If it cannot be helped, and one of
these must be dispensed with, which of the three should
be foregone first?” “The military equipment,” said the
Master.
Zigong again asked, “If it cannot be helped, and one
of the remaining two must be dispensed with, which of
them should be foregone?” The Master answered, “Part
with the food. From olden times, death has been the lot
of all men; but if the people have no faith in their rulers,
there is no standing for the state. . . .”
Ji Kang asked Confucius about government, saying,
“What do you say to killing the unprincipled for the
good of the principled?” Confucius replied, “Sir, in carrying on your government, why should you use killing
at all? Let your evinced desires be for what is good, and
the people will be good. The relation between superiors and inferiors is like that between the wind and the
grass. The grass must bend when the wind blows across
it. . . .”
The Master said, “When a prince’s personal conduct is correct, his government is effective without the
issuing of orders. If his personal conduct is not correct,
he may issue orders, but they will not be followed.”
FOR FURTHER REFLECTION

Compare Confucius’s understanding of moral virtue
with Zarathustra’s notion of morality discussed in the
previous chapter.

SOURCE: James Legge, trans. The Chinese Classics, 7 vols. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1893, 1:145, 146, 152, 254,
258–59, 266. (Translations slightly modified.)

Confucian Values

For Confucius, though, an advanced education represented only a part of the
preparation needed by the ideal government official. More important than formal
learning was the possession of a strong sense of moral integrity and a capacity to deliver wise and fair judgments. Thus Confucius encouraged his students to cultivate
high ethical standards and to hone their faculties of analysis and judgment.
Confucius emphasized several qualities in particular. One of them he called ren, by
which he meant an attitude of kindness and benevolence or a sense of humanity. Confucius explained that individuals possessing ren were courteous, respectful, diligent,
and loyal, and he considered ren a characteristic desperately needed in government

ben06937.Ch08_180-205.qxd

8/2/07

4:34 PM

Page 185

CHAPTER 8 |

The Unification of China

officials. Another quality of central importance was li, a sense of propriety, which
called for individuals to behave in conventionally appropriate fashion: they should
treat all other human beings with courtesy, while showing special respect and deference to elders or superiors. Yet another quality that Confucius emphasized was xiao,
filial piety, which reflected the high significance of the family in Chinese society. The
demands of filial piety obliged children to respect their parents and other family elders, look after their welfare, support them in old age, and remember them along
with other ancestors after their deaths.
Confucius emphasized personal qualities such as ren, li, and xiao because he believed that individuals who possessed those traits would gain influence in the larger society. Those who disciplined themselves and properly molded their characters would
not only possess personal self-control but also have the power of leading others by example. Only through enlightened leadership by morally strong individuals, Confucius
believed, was there any hope for the restoration of political and social order in China.
Thus his goal was not simply the cultivation of personal morality for its own sake but,
rather, the creation of junzi who could bring order and stability to China.
Because Confucius expressed his thought in general terms, later disciples could
adapt it to the particular problems of their times. Indeed, the flexibility of Confucian
thought helps to account for its remarkable longevity and influence in China. Two
later disciples of Confucius—Mencius and Xunzi—illustrate especially well the ways
in which Confucian thought lent itself to elaboration and adaptation.
Mencius (372–289 B.C.E.) was the most learned man of his age and the principal
spokesman for the Confucian school. During the Period of the Warring States, he
traveled widely throughout China, consulting with rulers and offering advice on political issues. Mencius firmly believed that human nature was basically good, and he
argued for policies that would allow it to influence society as a whole. Thus he placed
special emphasis on the Confucian virtue of ren and advocated government by benevolence and humanity. This principle implied that rulers would levy light taxes, avoid
wars, support education, and encourage harmony and cooperation. Critics charged
that Mencius held a naively optimistic view of human nature, arguing that his policies would rarely succeed in the real world where human interests, wills, and ambitions constantly clash. Indeed, Mencius’s advice had little practical effect during his
lifetime. Over the long term, however, his ideas deeply influenced the Confucian tradition. Since about the tenth century C.E., many Chinese scholars have considered
Mencius the most authoritative of Confucius’s early expositors.
Like Confucius and Mencius, Xunzi (298–238 B.C.E.) was a man of immense
learning, but unlike his predecessors, he also served for many years as a government
administrator. His practical experience encouraged him to develop a view of human
nature that was less rosy than Mencius’s view. Xunzi believed that human beings selfishly pursued their own interests, no matter what effects their actions had on others,
and resisted making any contribution voluntarily to the larger society. He considered
strong social discipline the best means to bring order to society. Thus whereas Mencius emphasized the Confucian quality of ren, Xunzi emphasized li. He advocated
the establishment of clear, well-publicized standards of conduct that would set limits
on the pursuit of individual interests and punish those who neglected their obligations to the larger society. Xunzi once likened human beings to pieces of warped
lumber: just as it was possible to straighten out bad wood, so too it was possible to
turn selfish and recalcitrant individuals into useful, contributing members of society.
But the process involved harsh social discipline similar to the steam treatments, heat
applications, hammering, bending, and forcible wrenching that turned warped wood
into useful lumber.

Mencius

Xunzi

Xiao (SHAYOH)

185

ben06937.Ch08_180-205.qxd

186

PART II |

8/2/07

4:34 PM

Page 186

The Formation of Classical Societies, 500 B.C.E. to 500 C.E.

Like Confucius and Mencius, however, Xunzi also believed that it was possible to
improve human beings and restore order to society. This fundamental optimism was
a basic characteristic of Confucian thought. It explains the high value that Confucian
thinkers placed on education and public behavior, and it accounts also for their activist approach to public affairs. Confucians involved themselves in society: they
sought government positions and made conscientious efforts to solve political and
social problems and to promote harmony in public life. By no means, however, did
the Confucians win universal praise for their efforts: to some of their contemporaries,
Confucian activism represented little more than misspent energy.

Daoism

Laozi and the
Daodejing

The Dao

The Doctrine
of Wuwei
wuwei (woo-WAY)

The Daoists were the most prominent critics of Confucian activism. Like Confucianism, Daoist thought developed in response to the turbulence of the late Zhou dynasty
and the Period of the Warring States. But unlike the Confucians, the Daoists considered it pointless to waste time and energy on problems that defied solution. Instead of
Confucian social activism, the Daoists devoted their energies to reflection and introspection, in hopes that they could understand the natural principles that governed the
world and could learn how to live in harmony with them. The Daoists believed that
over time, this approach would bring harmony to society as a whole, as people ceased
to meddle in affairs that they could not understand or control.
According to Chinese tradition, the founder of Daoism was a sage named Laozi
who lived during the sixth century B.C.E. Although there probably was a historical
Laozi, it is almost certain that several hands contributed to the Daodejing (Classic of
the Way and of Virtue), the basic exposition of Daoist beliefs traditionally ascribed to
Laozi, and that the book acquired its definitive form over several centuries. After the
Daodejing, the most important Daoist work was the Zhuangzi, named after its author,
the philosopher Zhuangzi (369–286 B.C.E.), who provided a well-reasoned compendium of Daoist views.
Daoism represented an effort to understand the fundamental character of the
world and nature. The central concept of Daoism is dao, meaning “the way,” more
specifically “the way of nature” or “the way of the cosmos.” Dao is an elusive concept, and the Daoists themselves did not generally characterize it in positive and
forthright terms. In the Daodejing, for example, dao figures as the original force of
the cosmos, an eternal and unchanging principle that governs all the workings of the
world. Yet the Daodejing envisioned dao as a supremely passive force and spoke of it
mostly in negative terms: Dao does nothing, and yet it accomplishes everything. Dao
resembles water, which is soft and yielding, yet is also so powerful that it eventually
erodes even the hardest rock placed in its path. Dao also resembles the cavity of a pot
or the hub of a wheel: although they are nothing more than empty spaces, they make
the pot and the wheel useful tools.
If the principles of dao governed the world, it followed that human beings should
tailor their behavior to its passive and yielding nature. To the Daoists, living in harmony with dao meant retreating from engagement in the world of politics and administration. Ambition and activism had not solved political and social problems. Far from
it: human striving had brought the world to a state of chaos. The proper response to
that situation was to cease frantic striving and live in as simple a manner as possible.
Thus early Daoists recognized as the chief moral virtue the trait of wuwei—disengagement from the competitive exertions and active involvement in affairs of the world.
Wuwei required that individuals refrain from advanced education (which concentrated
on abstruse trivialities) and from personal striving (which indicated excessive concern

ben06937.Ch08_180-205.qxd

8/2/07

4:34 PM

Page 187

CHAPTER 8 |

The Unification of China

187

A jade statue produced about the tenth
century C.E. depicts the sage Laozi on an
ox. Legends reported that Laozi rode a
blue ox from China to central Asia when
spreading his teachings.

with the tedious affairs of the world). Wuwei called instead for individuals to live simply, unpretentiously, and in harmony with nature.
Wuwei also had implications for state and society: the less government, the better.
Instead of expansive kingdoms and empires, the Daodejing envisioned a world of tiny,
self-sufficient communities where people had no desire to conquer their neighbors or
to trade with them. Indeed, even when people lived so close to the next community
that they could hear the dogs barking and cocks crowing, they would be so content
with their existence that they would not even have the desire to visit their neighbors!
Daoists subjected their philosophical rivals to ferocious attacks for dwelling on
trivial and superficial issues instead of practicing wuwei and living in harmony with nature. Zhuangzi in particular possessed a caustic wit that he deployed effectively in
mocking the Confucians and other philosophers for engaging in meaningless debates.
Once, for example, he related a fable about a keeper of monkeys who ran low on food
for his animals. He advised the monkeys that conditions forced him to cut their rations, so in the future he would bring them only three nuts in the morning and four
in the afternoon. When the monkeys exploded in fury, the keeper relented and promised to bring four nuts in the morning and three in the afternoon—a proposal that
the monkeys accepted with delight. The philosophers’ fierce debates, Zhuangzi implied, were just as insignificant as the uproar over the monkeys’ feeding schedule.
By encouraging the development of a reflective and introspective consciousness,
Daoism served as a counterbalance to the activism and extroversion of the Confucian
tradition. Indeed, Daoism encouraged the cultivation of self-knowledge in a way that
appealed strongly to Confucians as well as to Daoists. Because neither Confucianism
nor Daoism was an exclusive faith that precluded observance of the other, it has been
possible through the centuries for individuals to study the Confucian curriculum and
take administrative posts in the government while devoting their private hours to reflection on human nature and the place of humans in the larger world—to live as
Confucians by day, as it were, and Daoists by night.

Political Implications
of Daoism

ben06937.Ch08_180-205.qxd

188

PART II |

8/2/07

4:34 PM

Page 188

The Formation of Classical Societies, 500 B.C.E. to 500 C.E.

Sources from the Past
Laozi on Living in Harmony with Dao
Committed Daoists mostly rejected opportunities to play active roles in government. Yet like the Confucians, the Daoists
held strong views on virtuous behavior, and their understanding of dao had deep political implications, as exemplified by
the following excerpts from the Daodejing.
The highest goodness is like water, for water is excellent
in benefitting all things, and it does not strive. It occupies the lowest place, which men abhor. And therefore it
is near akin to the dao. . . .
In governing men and in serving heaven, there is
nothing like moderation. For only by moderation can
there be an early return to the normal state of humankind. This early return is the same as a great storage of
virtue. With a great storage of virtue there is nothing that
may not be achieved. If there is nothing that may not be
achieved, then no one will know to what extent this
power reaches. And if no one knows to what extent a
man’s power reaches, that man is fit to be the ruler of a
state. Having the secret of rule, his rule shall endure. Setting the tap-root deep, and making the spreading roots
firm: this is the way to ensure long life to the tree. . . .
Use uprightness in ruling a state; employ indirect
methods in waging war; practice non-interference in
order to win the empire. . . .

The greater the number of laws and enactments, the
more thieves and robbers there will be. Therefore the
Sage [Laozi] says: “So long as I do nothing, the people
will work out their own reformation. So long as I love
calm, the people will right themselves. If only I keep
from meddling, the people will grow rich. If only I am
free from desire, the people will come naturally back to
simplicity. . . .”
There is nothing in the world more soft and weak
than water, yet for attacking things that are hard and
strong, there is nothing that surpasses it, nothing that
can take its place.
The soft overcomes the hard; the weak overcomes
the strong. There is no one in the world but knows this
truth, and no one who can put it into practice.
FOR FURTHER REFLECTION

To what extent did Daoists offer useful or practical political alternatives in the Period of the Warring States?

SOURCE: Lionel Giles, trans. The Sayings of Lao Tzu. London: John Murray, 1905, pp. 26, 29–30, 41, 50.
(Translations slightly modified.)

Legalism

Shang Yang

Ultimately, neither Confucian activism nor Daoist retreat was able to solve the problems that plagued China during the Period of the Warring States. Order returned to
China only after the emergence of a third school of thought—that of the Legalists—
which promoted a practical and ruthlessly efficient approach to statecraft. Unlike the
Confucians, the Legalists did not concern themselves with ethics, morality, or propriety. Unlike the Daoists, the Legalists cared nothing about principles governing the
world or the place of human beings in nature. Instead, they devoted their attention
exclusively to the state, which they sought to strengthen and expand at all costs.
Legalist doctrine emerged from the insights of men who participated actively in
Chinese political affairs during the late fourth century B.C.E. Most notable of them was
Shang Yang (ca. 390–338 B.C.E.), who served as chief minister to the duke of the Qin
state in western China. His policies survive in a work entitled The Book of Lord Shang,
which most likely includes contributions from other ministers as well as from Shang
Yang himself. Though a clever and efficient administrator, Shang Yang also was despised and feared because of his power and ruthlessness. Upon the death of his patron,
the duke of Qin, Shang Yang quickly fell: his enemies at court executed him, mutilated
his body, and annihilated his family.

ben06937.Ch08_180-205.qxd

8/2/07

4:34 PM

Page 189

CHAPTER 8 |

The Unification of China

The most systematic of the Legalist theorists was Han Feizi (ca. 280–233 B.C.E.),
a student of the Confucian scholar Xunzi. Han Feizi carefully reviewed Legalist ideas
from political thinkers in all parts of China and synthesized them in a collection of
powerful and well-argued essays on statecraft. Like Shang Yang, Han Feizi served as
an advisor at the Qin court, and he too fell afoul of other ambitious men, who forced
him to end his life by taking poison. The Legalist state itself thus consumed the two
foremost exponents of Legalist doctrine.
Shang Yang, Han Feizi, and other Legalists reasoned that the foundations of a
state’s strength were agriculture and armed forces. Thus Legalists sought to channel
as many individuals as possible into cultivation or military service while discouraging
them from pursuing careers as merchants, entrepreneurs, scholars, educators, philosophers, poets, or artists, since those lines of work did not directly advance the interests
of the state.
The Legalists expected to harness subjects’ energy by means of clear and strict
laws—hence the name “Legalist.” Their faith in laws distinguished the Legalists clearly
from the Confucians, who relied on ritual, custom, education, a sense of propriety,
and the humane example of benevolent junzi administrators to induce individuals to
behave appropriately. The Legalists believed that those influences were not powerful
enough to persuade subjects to subordinate their self-interest to the needs of the state.
They imposed a strict legal regimen that clearly outlined expectations and provided
severe punishment, swiftly administered, for violators. They believed that if people
feared to commit small crimes, they would hesitate all the more before committing
great crimes. Thus Legalists imposed harsh penalties even for minor infractions: individuals could suffer amputation of their hands or feet, for example, for disposing of
ashes or trash in the street. The Legalists also established the principle of collective responsibility before the law. They expected all members of a family or community to
observe the others closely, forestall any illegal activity, and report any infractions. Failing those obligations, all members of a family or community were liable to punishment along with the actual violator.
The Legalists’ principles of government did not win them much popularity. Over
the course of the centuries, Chinese moral and political philosophers have had little
praise for the Legalists, and few have openly associated themselves with the Legalist
school. Yet Legalist doctrine lent itself readily to practical application, and Legalist
principles of government quickly produced remarkable results for rulers who adopted
them. In fact, Legalist methods put an end to the Period of the Warring States and
brought about the unification of China.

189

Han Feizi

Legalist Doctrine

The Unification of China
During the Period of the Warring States, rulers of several regional states adopted elements of the Legalist program. Legalist doctrines met the most enthusiastic response
in the state of Qin, in western China, where Shang Yang and Han Feizi oversaw the
implementation of Legalist policies. The Qin state soon dominated its neighbors and
imposed centralized imperial rule throughout China. Qin rule survived only for a few
years, but the succeeding Han dynasty followed the Qin example by governing China
through a centralized imperial administration.

The Qin Dynasty
During the fourth and third centuries B.C.E., the Qin state underwent a remarkable
round of economic, political, and military development. Shang Yang encouraged

The Kingdom of Qin

ben06937.Ch08_180-205.qxd

190

PART II |

8/2/07

4:34 PM

Page 190

The Formation of Classical Societies, 500 B.C.E. to 500 C.E.

Qin Empire
Defensive walls

G O B I D E S E RT

MONGOLIA

ua

w

He

)

EA

Xianyang

Hao
Xi’an

o
Ye l l
Luoyang

ng

OR

Lanzhou

K

Yan

(H

Ye l l o w
Sea

ng)

Ch

an

g

Jia

Shu

(

East
China
Sea
Nanhai

YUE

TAIWAN

0

South China Sea
Map 8.1 China under the
Qin dynasty, 221–207 B.C.E.
Compare the size of Qin
territories to those of earlier
Chinese kingdoms depicted in
Maps 5.1 and 5.2. How is it
possible to account for the
greater reach of the Qin
dynasty?

The First Emperor

0

500 mi

250
500

1000 km

peasant cultivators to migrate to the sparsely populated state. By granting them private plots and allowing them to enjoy generous profits, his policy dramatically
boosted agricultural production. By granting land rights to individual cultivators, his
policy also weakened the economic position of the hereditary aristocratic classes.
That approach allowed Qin rulers to establish centralized, bureaucratic rule throughout their state. Meanwhile, they devoted the newfound wealth of their state to the
organization of a powerful army equipped with the most effective iron weapons available. During the third century B.C.E., the kingdom of Qin gradually but consistently
grew at the expense of the other Chinese states. Qin rulers attacked one state after
another, absorbing each new conquest into their centralized structure, until finally
they had brought China for the first time under the sway of a single state.
In the year 221 B.C.E., the king of Qin proclaimed himself the First Emperor and
decreed that his descendants would follow him and reign for thousands of generations.
The First Emperor, Qin Shihuangdi (reigned 221–210 B.C.E.), could not know that his
dynasty would last only fourteen years and in 207 B.C.E. would dissolve because of civil
insurrections. Yet the Qin dynasty had a significance out of proportion to its short life.

ben06937.Ch08_180-205.qxd

8/2/07

4:34 PM

Page 191

CHAPTER 8 |

The Unification of China

Like the Achaemenid empire
in Persia, the Qin dynasty established a tradition of centralized imperial rule that
provided large-scale political
organization over the long
term of Chinese history.
Like his ancestors in the
kingdom of Qin, the First
Emperor of China ignored
the nobility and ruled his empire through a centralized
bureaucracy. He governed
from his capital at Xianyang,
near the early Zhou capital
of Hao and the modern city
of Xi’an. The remainder of
China he divided into administrative provinces and
districts, and he entrusted
the communication and implementation of his policies
to officers of the central government who served at the
pleasure of the emperor himself. He disarmed regional
military forces and destroyed
fortresses that might serve as
points of rebellion or resistance. He built roads to facilA life-size model of an infantryman suggests the
itate communications and
discipline that drove the armies of Qin Shihuangdi.
the movement of armies. He
also drafted laborers by the
hundreds of thousands to build defensive walls. Regional kings in northern and western
regions of China had already constructed many walls in their realms in an effort to discourage raids by nomadic peoples. Qin Shihuangdi ordered workers to link the existing
sections into a massive defensive barrier that was a precursor to the Great Wall of China.
It is likely that many Chinese welcomed the political stability introduced by the
Qin dynasty, but by no means did the new regime win universal acceptance. Confucians, Daoists, and others launched a vigorous campaign of criticism. In an effort to
reassert his authority, Qin Shihuangdi ordered execution for those who criticized his
regime, and he demanded the burning of all books of philosophy, ethics, history, and
literature. His decree exempted works on medicine, fortune-telling, and agriculture
on the grounds that they had some utilitarian value. The emperor also spared the official history of the Qin state. Other works, however, largely went into the flames
during the next few years.
The First Emperor took his policy seriously and enforced it earnestly. In the year
following his decree, Qin Shihuangdi sentenced some 460 scholars residing in the
capital to be buried alive for their criticism of his regime, and he forced many other
critics from the provinces into the army and dispatched them to dangerous frontier
posts. For the better part of a generation, there was no open discussion of classical

The Burning
of the Books

Xianyang (SHYAHNYAHNG)

191

ben06937.Ch08_180-205.qxd

192

PART II |

8/2/07

Page 192

The Formation of Classical Societies, 500 B.C.E. to 500 C.E.

Qin Centralization

Standardized Script

Tomb of the
First Emperor

4:34 PM

literary or philosophical works. When it became safe again to speak openly, scholars
began a long and painstaking task of reconstructing the suppressed texts. In some
cases scholars had managed, at great personal risk, to hide copies of the forbidden
books, which they retrieved and recirculated. In other cases they reassembled texts
that they had committed to memory. In many cases, however, works suppressed by
Qin Shihuangdi simply disappeared.
The First Emperor launched several initiatives that enhanced the unity of China. In
keeping with his policy of centralization, he standardized the laws, currencies, weights,
and measures of the various regions of China. Previously, regional states had organized
their own legal and economic systems, which often conflicted with one another and
hampered commerce and communications across state boundaries. Uniform coinage
and legal standards encouraged the integration of China’s various regions into a more
tightly knit society than had ever been conceivable before. The roads and bridges that
Qin Shihuangdi built throughout his realm, like those built in other classical societies,
also encouraged economic integration: though constructed largely with military uses
in mind, they served as fine highways for interregional commerce.
Perhaps even more important than his legal and economic policies was the First
Emperor’s standardization of Chinese script. Before the Qin dynasty, all regions of
China used scripts derived from the one employed at the Shang court, but they had
developed along different lines and had become mutually unrecognizable. In hopes of
ensuring better understanding and uniform application of his policies, Qin Shihuangdi
mandated the use of a common script throughout his empire. The regions of China
continued to use different spoken languages, as they do even today, but they wrote
those languages with a common script—just as if Europeans spoke English, French,
German, Italian, Russian, Spanish, and other languages but wrote them all down in
Latin. In China, speakers of different languages use the same written symbols, but pronounce them and process them mentally in different ways. Nevertheless, the common
script enables them to communicate in writing across linguistic boundaries.
In spite of his ruthlessness, Qin Shihuangdi ranks as one of the most important
figures in Chinese history. The First Emperor established a precedent for centralized
imperial rule, which remained the norm in China until the early twentieth century.
He also pointed China in the direction of political and cultural unity, and with some
periods of interruption, China has remained politically and culturally unified to the
present day.
Qin Shihuangdi died in 210 B.C.E. His final resting place was a lavish tomb constructed by some seven hundred thousand drafted laborers as a permanent monument
to the First Emperor. Rare and expensive grave goods accompanied the emperor in
burial, along with sacrificed slaves, concubines, and many of the craftsmen who designed and built the tomb. Qin Shihuangdi was laid to rest in an elaborate underground palace lined with bronze and protected by traps and crossbows rigged to fire at
intruders. The ceiling of the palace featured paintings of the stars and planets, and a
vast map of the First Emperor’s realm, with flowing mercury representing its rivers and
seas, decorated the floor. Buried in the vicinity of the tomb was an entire army of lifesize pottery figures to guard the emperor in death. Since 1974, when scholars began
to excavate the area around Qin Shihuangdi’s tomb, more than fifteen thousand terracotta sculptures have come to light, including magnificently detailed soldiers, horses,
and weapons.
The terra-cotta army of Qin Shihuangdi protected his tomb until recent times, but
it could not save his successors or his empire. The First Emperor had conscripted millions of laborers from all parts of China to work on ambitious public works projects

ben06937.Ch08_180-205.qxd

8/2/07

4:34 PM

Page 193

CHAPTER 8 |

The Unification of China

One detachment of the formidable, life-size, terra-cotta army buried in the vicinity of Qin Shihuangdi’s tomb
to protect the emperor after his death. The army consists of soldiers by the tens of thousands, along with
weapons, horses, carts, and equipment.

such as palaces, roads, bridges, irrigation systems, defensive walls, and his tomb. Although those projects increased productivity and promoted the integration of China’s
various regions, they also generated tremendous ill will among laborers compelled to
leave their families and their lands. Revolts began in the year after Qin Shihuangdi’s
death, and in 207 B.C.E. waves of rebels overwhelmed the Qin court, slaughtering government officials and burning state buildings. The Qin dynasty quickly dissolved in
chaos.

The Early Han Dynasty
The bloody end of the Qin dynasty might well have ended the experiment with centralized imperial rule in China. Although ambitious governors and generals could have
carved China into regions and contested one another for hegemony in a reprise of the
Period of the Warring States, centralized rule returned almost immediately, largely because of a determined commander named Liu Bang. Judging from the historian Sima
Qian’s account, Liu Bang was not a colorful or charismatic figure, but he was a persistent man and a methodical planner. He surrounded himself with brilliant advisors and
enjoyed the unwavering loyalty of his troops. By 206 B.C.E. he had restored order
throughout China and established himself at the head of a new dynasty.
Liu Bang called the new dynasty the Han, in honor of his native land. The Han dynasty turned out to be one of the longest and most influential in all of Chinese history.
It lasted for more than four hundred years, from 206 B.C.E. to 220 C.E., although for
a brief period (9–23 C.E.) a usurper temporarily displaced Han rule. Thus historians

Liu Bang

193

ben06937.Ch08_180-205.qxd

194

PART II |

8/2/07

Page 194

The Formation of Classical Societies, 500 B.C.E. to 500 C.E.

Early Han Policies

The Martial Emperor,
Han Wudi

Han Centralization

4:34 PM

conventionally divide the dynasty into the Former Han (206 B.C.E.–9 C.E.) and the
Later Han (25–220 C.E.).
The Han dynasty consolidated the tradition of centralized imperial rule that the
Qin dynasty had pioneered. During the Former Han, emperors ruled from Chang’an,
a cosmopolitan city near modern Xi’an that became the cultural capital of China. They
mostly used wood as a building material, and later dynasties built over their city, so
nothing of Han-era Chang’an survives. Contemporaries described Chang’an as a thriving metropolis with a fine imperial palace, busy markets, and expansive parks. During
the Later Han, the emperors moved their capital east to Luoyang, also a cosmopolitan
city second in importance only to Chang’an throughout much of Chinese history.
During the early days of the Han dynasty, Liu Bang attempted to follow a middle
path between the decentralized network of political alliances of the Zhou dynasty and
the tightly centralized state of the Qin. Zhou decentralization encouraged political
chaos, he thought, because regional governors were powerful enough to resist the emperor and pursue their own ambitions. Liu Bang thought that Qin centralization created a new set of problems, however, because it provided little incentive for imperial
family members to support the dynasty.
Liu Bang tried to save the advantages and avoid the excesses of both Zhou and Qin
dynasties. On the one hand, he allotted large landholdings to members of the imperial
family, in the expectation that they would provide a reliable network of support for his
rule. On the other hand, he divided the empire into administrative districts governed
by officials who served at the emperor’s pleasure in the expectation that he could exercise effective control over the development and implementation of his policies.
Liu Bang learned quickly that reliance on his family did not guarantee support
for the emperor. In 200 B.C.E. an army of nomadic Xiongnu warriors besieged Liu
Bang and almost captured him. He managed to escape—but without receiving the
support he had expected from his family members. From that point forward, Liu
Bang and his successors followed a policy of centralization. They reclaimed lands
from family members, absorbed those lands into the imperial domain, and entrusted
political responsibilities to an administrative bureaucracy. Thus, despite a brief flirtation with a decentralized government, the Han dynasty left as its principal political
legacy a tradition of centralized imperial rule.
Much of the reason for the Han dynasty’s success was the long reign of the dynasty’s greatest and most energetic emperor, Han Wudi, the “Martial Emperor,”
who occupied the imperial throne for fifty-four years, from 141 to 87 B.C.E. Han
Wudi ruled his empire with vision and vigor. He pursued two policies in particular:
administrative centralization and imperial expansion.
Domestically, Han Wudi worked strenuously to increase the authority and the prestige of the central government. He built an enormous bureaucracy to administer his
empire, and he relied on Legalist principles of government. Like Qin Shihuangdi, Han
Wudi sent imperial officers to implement his policies and maintain order in administrative provinces and districts. He also continued the Qin policy of building roads and
canals to facilitate trade and communication between China’s regions. To finance the
vast machinery of his government, he levied taxes on agriculture, trade, and craft industries, and he established imperial monopolies on the production of essential goods
such as iron and salt while placing the lucrative liquor industry under state supervision.
In building such an enormous governmental structure, Han Wudi faced a serious
problem of recruitment. He needed thousands of reliable, intelligent, educated individuals to run his bureaucracy, but education in China took place largely on an individual, ad hoc basis. Men such as Confucius, Mencius, and Xunzi accepted students

ben06937.Ch08_180-205.qxd

8/2/07

4:34 PM

Page 195

CHAPTER 8 |

The Unification of China

195

Model of a chariot of the kind used by high imperial officials in the Qin and Han dynasties. Crafted from bronze with silver
inlay, this model is about one-third life size.

and tutored them, but there was no system to provide a continuous supply of educated candidates for office.
Han Wudi addressed that problem in 124 B.C.E. by establishing an imperial university that prepared young men for government service. Personally, the Martial Emperor was a practical man of affairs who cared little for learning. To demonstrate his
contempt for academic pursuits, Liu Bang once emptied his bladder in the distinctive
cap worn by Confucian scholars! Yet Han Wudi recognized that the success of his efforts at bureaucratic centralization would depend on a corps of educated officeholders. The imperial university took Confucianism—the only Chinese cultural tradition
developed enough to provide rigorous intellectual discipline—as the basis for its curriculum. Ironically, then, while he relied on Legalist principles of government, Han
Wudi ensured the long-term survival of the Confucian tradition by establishing it as
the official imperial ideology. By the end of the Former Han dynasty, the imperial
university enrolled more than three thousand students, and by the end of the Later
Han, the student population had risen to more than thirty thousand.
While he moved aggressively to centralize power and authority at home, Han
Wudi pursued an equally vigorous foreign policy of imperial expansion. He invaded
northern Vietnam and Korea, subjected them to Han rule, and brought them into
the orbit of Chinese society. He ruled both lands through a Chinese-style government, and Confucian values followed the Han armies into the new colonies. Over
the course of the centuries, the educational systems of both northern Vietnam and
Korea drew their inspiration almost entirely from Confucianism.
The greatest foreign challenge that Han Wudi faced came from the Xiongnu, a
nomadic people from the steppes of central Asia who spoke a Turkish language. Like

The Confucian
Educational System

Han Imperial
Expansion

The Xiongnu

ben06937.Ch08_180-205.qxd

196

8/2/07

4:34 PM

Page 196

The Formation of Classical Societies, 500 B.C.E. to 500 C.E.

PART II |

L ake
B ai kal
Ar al
Se a
MONGOLIA

o
Yell w

TA K L A M A K A N D E S E R T

KO

(Huan

A

BACTRIA

Luoyang

Chang’an

RE

Yan

g H e)

Lanzhou

Ye llow
S ea

TIBET

HI

MA

Eas t
C hin a
Sea

zi
)
Yang Jiang
g
( Ch a n

L A YA S

INDIA
Re

500

g

500 mi

250

Guangzhou

kon

Xiongnu confederation
0

West

Me

Han empire

0

d

HAINAN

S ou t h
China
S ea

TAIWAN

VIETNAM

1000 km

Map 8.2 East Asia and
central Asia at the time of
Han Wudi, ca. 87 B.C.E. Note
the indication in this map that
Han authority extended to
Korea and central Asia during
the first century B.C.E. What
strategic value did these
regions hold for the Han
dynasty?

most of the other nomadic peoples of central Asia, the Xiongnu were superb horsemen. Xiongnu boys learned to ride sheep and shoot rodents at an early age, and as
they grew older they graduated to larger animals and aimed their bows and arrows at
larger prey. Their weaponry was not as sophisticated as that of the Chinese: their bows
and arrows were not nearly as lethal as the ingenious and powerful crossbows wielded
by Chinese warriors. But their mobility offered the Xiongnu a distinct advantage.
When they could not satisfy their needs and desires through peaceful trade, they
mounted sudden raids into villages or trading areas, where they commandeered food
supplies or manufactured goods and then rapidly departed. Because they had no cities
or settled places to defend, the Xiongnu could quickly disperse when confronted by a
superior force.
During the reign of Maodun (210–174 B.C.E.), their most successful leader, the
Xiongnu ruled a vast federation of nomadic peoples that stretched from the Aral Sea to
the Yellow Sea. Maodun brought strict military discipline to the Xiongnu. According
to Sima Qian, Maodun once instructed his forces to shoot their arrows at whatever target he himself selected. He aimed in succession at his favorite horse, one of his wives,
and his father’s best horse, and he summarily executed those who failed to discharge
their arrows. When his forces reliably followed his orders, Maodun targeted his father,
who immediately fell under a hail of arrows, leaving Maodun as the Xiongnu chief.
With its highly disciplined army, the Xiongnu empire was a source of concern to
the Han emperors. During the early days of the dynasty, they attempted to pacify the
Xiongnu by paying them tribute—providing them with food and finished goods in
hopes that they would refrain from mounting raids in China—or by arranging mar-

ben06937.Ch08_180-205.qxd

8/2/07

4:34 PM

Page 197

CHAPTER 8 |

The Unification of China

riages between the ruling houses of the two peoples in hopes of establishing peaceful
diplomatic relations. Neither method succeeded for long.
Ultimately, Han Wudi decided to go on the offensive against the Xiongnu. He invaded central Asia with vast armies—sometimes including as many as one hundred
thousand troops—and brought much of the Xiongnu empire under Chinese military
control. He pacified a long central Asian corridor extending almost to Bactria, which
prevented the Xiongnu from maintaining the integrity of their empire and which served
also as the lifeline of a trade network that linked much of the Eurasian landmass. He
even planted colonies of Chinese cultivators in the oasis communities of central Asia.
As a result of those efforts, the Xiongnu empire soon fell into disarray. For the moment, the Han state enjoyed uncontested hegemony in both east Asia and central Asia.
Before long, however, economic and social problems within China brought serious
problems for the Han dynasty itself.

Han Expansion
into Central Asia

From Economic Prosperity
to Social Disorder
Already during the Xia, Shang, and Zhou dynasties, a productive agricultural economy supported the emergence of complex society in China. High agricultural productivity continued during the Qin and Han dynasties, and it supported the
development of craft industries such as the forging of iron tools and the weaving of
silk textiles. During the Han dynasty, however, China experienced serious social and
economic problems as land became concentrated in the hands of a small, wealthy elite
class. Social tensions generated banditry, rebellion, and even the temporary deposition of the Han state itself. Although Han rulers regained the throne, they presided
over a much-weakened realm. By the early third century C.E., social and political problems had brought the Han dynasty to an end.

Productivity and Prosperity during the Former Han
The structure of Chinese society during the Qin and Han dynasties was similar to
that of the Zhou era. Patriarchal households averaged five inhabitants, although several generations of aristocratic families sometimes lived together in large compounds.
During the Han dynasty, moralists sought to enhance the authority of patriarchal
family heads by emphasizing the importance of filial piety and women’s subordination to their menfolk. The anonymous Confucian Classic of Filial Piety, composed
probably in the early Han dynasty, taught that children should obey and honor their
parents as well as other superiors and political authorities. Similarly, Ban Zhao, a
well-educated woman from a prominent Han family, wrote a widely read treatise entitled Admonitions for Women that emphasized humility, obedience, subservience,
and devotion to their husbands as the virtues most appropriate for women. To Confucian moralists and government authorities alike, orderly, patriarchal families were
the foundations of a stable society.
The vast majority of the Chinese population worked in the countryside cultivating
grains and vegetables, which they harvested in larger quantities than ever before. In
late Zhou times, cultivators often strengthened their plows with iron tips, but metalworkers did not produce enough iron to provide all-metal tools. During the Han dynasty the iron industry entered a period of rapid growth—partly because Han rulers
favored the industry and encouraged its expansion—and cultivators soon used not only

Patriarchal
Social Order

197

ben06937.Ch08_180-205.qxd

198

PART II |

Iron Metallurgy

Silk Textiles

Paper

8/2/07

4:34 PM

Page 198

The Formation of Classical Societies, 500 B.C.E. to 500 C.E.

plows but also shovels, picks, hoes,
sickles, and spades with iron parts.
The tougher implements enabled cultivators to produce more food and
support larger populations than ever
before. The agricultural surplus allowed many Chinese to produce fine
manufactured goods and to engage
in trade.
The significance of the iron industry went far beyond agriculture. Han
artisans experimented with production techniques and learned to craft
fine utensils for both domestic and
military uses. Iron pots, stoves, knives,
needles, axes, hammers, saws, and
other tools became standard fixtures
in households that could not have afforded more expensive bronze utensils. The ready availability of iron also
had important military implications.
Craftsmen designed suits of iron armor to protect soldiers against arrows
and blows, and the strength and sharpness of Han swords, spears, and arClay model of an aristocratic house of the sort
rowheads help to explain the success
inhabited by a powerful clan during the Han
of Chinese armies against the Xiongnu
dynasty. This model came from a tomb near
the city of Guangzhou in southern China.
and other nomadic peoples.
Textile production—particularly
sericulture, the manufacture of silk—became an especially important industry. The origins of sericulture date to the fourth millennium B.C.E., long before the ancient Xia dynasty, but only in Han times did sericulture expand from its original home in the Yellow
River valley to most parts of China. It developed especially rapidly in the southern regions known today as Sichuan and Guangdong provinces, and the industry thrived
after the establishment of long-distance trade relations with western lands in the second century B.C.E.
Although silkworms inhabited much of Eurasia, Chinese silk was especially fine because of advanced sericulture techniques. Chinese producers bred their silkworms, fed
them on finely chopped mulberry leaves, and carefully unraveled their cocoons so as to
obtain long fibers of raw silk that they wove into light, strong, lustrous fabrics. (In
other lands, producers relied on wild silkworms that ate a variety of leaves and chewed
through their cocoons, leaving only short fibers that yielded lower-quality fabrics.)
Chinese silk became a prized commodity in India, Persia, Mesopotamia, and even the
distant Roman empire. Commerce in silk and other products led to the establishment
of an intricate network of trade routes known collectively as the silk roads (discussed in
chapter 12).
While expanding the iron and silk industries, Han craftsmen also invented paper. In
earlier times Chinese scribes had written mostly on bamboo strips and silk fabrics but
also inscribed messages on oracle bones and bronze wares. Probably before 100 C.E.
Chinese craftsmen began to fashion hemp, bark, and textile fibers into sheets of

ben06937.Ch08_180-205.qxd

8/2/07

4:34 PM

Page 199

CHAPTER 8 |

The Unification of China

199

Han gentlemen sport luxurious silk gowns as they engage in sophisticated conversation.
Wealthy individuals and ruling elites commonly dressed in silk, but peasants and others
of the lower classes rarely if ever donned silk garments.

paper, which was less expensive than silk and easier to write on than bamboo. Although wealthy elites continued to read books written on silk rolls, paper soon became the preferred medium for most writing.
High agricultural productivity supported rapid demographic growth and general
prosperity during the early part of the Han dynasty. Historians estimate that in about
220 B.C.E., just after the founding of the Qin dynasty, the Chinese population was
about twenty million. By the year 9 C.E., at the end of the Former Han dynasty, it
had tripled to sixty million. Meanwhile, taxes claimed only a small portion of production, yet state granaries bulged so much that their contents sometimes spoiled
before they could be consumed.

Economic and Social Difficulties
In spite of general prosperity, China began to experience economic and social difficulties in the Former Han period. The military adventures and the central Asian policy of
Han Wudi caused severe economic strain. Expeditions against the Xiongnu and the
establishment of agricultural colonies in central Asia were extremely expensive undertakings, and they rapidly consumed the empire’s surplus wealth. To finance his ventures, Han Wudi raised taxes and confiscated land and personal property from wealthy
individuals, sometimes on the pretext that they had violated imperial laws. Those measures did not kill industry and commerce in China, but they discouraged investment
in manufacturing and trading enterprises, which in turn had a dampening effect on
the larger economy.

Population Growth

ben06937.Ch08_180-205.qxd

200

PART II |

8/2/07

4:34 PM

Page 200

The Formation of Classical Societies, 500 B.C.E. to 500 C.E.

In Han times the wealthiest classes enjoyed the privilege of being buried in suits of jade plaques sewn together
with gold threads, like the burial dress of Liu Sheng, who died in 113 B.C.E. at Manzheng in Hebei Province.
Legend held that jade prevented decomposition of the deceased’s body. Scholars have estimated that
a jade burial suit like this one required ten years’ labor.

Social Tensions

Land Distribution

The Reign of
Wang Mang

Distinctions between rich and poor hardened during the course of the Han dynasty. Wealthy individuals wore fine silk garments, leather shoes, and jewelry of jade
and gold, whereas the poor classes made do with rough hemp clothing and sandals.
Tables in wealthy households held pork, fish, fowl, and fine aged wines, but the diet
of the poor consisted mostly of grain or rice supplemented by small quantities of
vegetables or meat. By the first century B.C.E., social and economic differences had
generated serious tensions, and peasants in hard-pressed regions began to organize
rebellions in hopes of gaining a larger share of Han society’s resources.
A particularly difficult problem concerned the distribution of land. Individual economic problems brought on by poor harvests, high taxes, or crushing burdens of debt
forced many small landowners to sell their property under unfavorable conditions or
even to forfeit it in exchange for cancellation of their debts. In extreme cases, individuals had to sell themselves and their families into slavery to satisfy their creditors. Owners of large estates not only increased the size of their holdings by absorbing the
property of their less fortunate neighbors but also increased the efficiency of their operations by employing cheap labor. Sometimes cheap laborers came in the form of
slaves, other times in the form of tenant farmers who had to deliver as much as half
their produce to the landowner for the right to till his property. In either case the laborers worked on terms that favored the landlords.
By the end of the first century B.C.E., land had accumulated in the hands of a relatively small number of individuals who owned vast estates, while ever-increasing
numbers of peasant cultivators led difficult lives with few prospects for improvement.
Landless peasants became restive, and Chinese society faced growing problems of
banditry and sporadic rebellion. Because the Han emperors depended heavily on the
political cooperation of large landowners, however, they did not attempt any serious
reform of the landholding system.
Tensions came to a head during the early first century C.E. when a powerful and
respected Han minister named Wang Mang undertook a thoroughgoing program of
reform. In 6 C.E. a two-year-old boy inherited the Han imperial throne. Because the
boy was unable to govern, Wang Mang served as his regent. Many officials regarded
Wang as more capable than members of the Han family and urged him to claim the
imperial honor for himself. In 9 C.E. he did just that: announcing that the mandate

ben06937.Ch08_180-205.qxd

8/2/07

4:34 PM

Page 201

CHAPTER 8 |

The Unification of China

A painted brick depicts a peasant working in the fields with a team of oxen and a wooden
harrow. By the Han dynasty, many plows of this type had iron teeth. Produced in the third or
fourth century C.E., this brick painting came from a tomb in Gansu Province in western China.

of heaven had passed from the Han to his family, he seized the throne. Wang Mang
then introduced a series of wide-ranging reforms that have prompted historians to
refer to him as the “socialist emperor.”
The most important reforms concerned landed property: Wang Mang limited the
amount of land that a family could hold and ordered officials to break up large estates,
redistribute them, and provide landless individuals with property to cultivate. Despite
his good intentions, the socialist emperor attempted to impose his policy without adequate preparation and communication. The result was confusion: landlords resisted a
policy that threatened their holdings, and even peasants found its application inconsistent and unsatisfactory. After several years of chaos, Wang Mang faced the additional
misfortune of poor harvests and famine, which sparked widespread revolts against his
rule. In 23 C.E. a coalition of disgruntled landlords and desperate peasants ended both
his dynasty and his life.

The Later Han Dynasty
Within two years a recovered Han dynasty returned to power, but it ruled over a
weakened realm. The Later Han emperors even decided to abandon Chang’an, which
had suffered grave damage during the years of chaos and rebellion, and establish a
new capital at Luoyang. Nevertheless, during the early years of the Later Han, emperors ruled vigorously in the manner of Liu Bang and Han Wudi. They regained
control of the centralized administration and reorganized the state bureaucracy. They
also maintained the Chinese presence in central Asia, continued to keep the Xiongnu
in submission, and exercised firm control over the silk roads.
The Later Han emperors did not seriously address the problem of land distribution
that had helped to bring down the Former Han dynasty. The wealthy classes still lived
in relative luxury while peasants worked under difficult conditions. The empire continued to suffer the effects of banditry and rebellions organized by desperate peasants
with few opportunities to improve their lot. The Yellow Turban uprising—so named
because of the distinctive headgear worn by the rebels—was a particularly serious revolt that raged throughout China and tested the resilience of the Han state during the

The Yellow
Turban Uprising

201

ben06937.Ch08_180-205.qxd

202

PART II |

8/2/07

4:34 PM

Page 202

The Formation of Classical Societies, 500 B.C.E. to 500 C.E.

Though it dates from a somewhat later era, about the sixth century C.E., this cave painting from Dunhuang in Gansu
Province (western China) offers some idea of the chaos that engulfed China as the Han dynasty crumbled.

Collapse of the
Han Dynasty

late second century C.E. Although the Later Han dynasty possessed the military power
required to keep civil disorder under reasonable control, rebellions by the Yellow Turbans and others weakened the Han state during the second and third centuries C.E.
The Later Han emperors were unable, however, to prevent the development of factions at court that paralyzed the central government. Factions of imperial family members, Confucian scholar bureaucrats, and court eunuchs sought to increase their
influence, protect their own interests, and destroy their rivals. On several occasions relations between the various factions became so strained that they made war against
each other. In 189 C.E., for example, a faction led by an imperial relative descended on
the Han palace and slaughtered more than two thousand beardless men in an effort to
destroy the eunuchs as a political force. In that respect the attack succeeded. From the
unmeasured violence of the operation, however, it is clear that the Later Han dynasty
had reached a point of internal weakness from which it could not easily recover. Indeed, early in the next century, the central government disintegrated, and for almost
four centuries China remained divided into several large regional kingdoms.

ben06937.Ch08_180-205.qxd

8/2/07

4:34 PM

Page 203

CHAPTER 8 |

T

The Unification of China

he Qin state lasted for a short fourteen years, but it opened a new era in Chinese history. Qin conquerors imposed unified rule on a series of politically independent king-

doms and launched an ambitious program to forge culturally distinct regions into a larger
Chinese society. The Han dynasty endured for more than four centuries and largely completed the project of unifying China. Han rulers built a centralized bureaucracy that
administered a unified empire, thus establishing a precedent for centralized imperial rule
in China. They also entered into a close alliance with Confucian moralists who organized
a system of advanced education that provided recruits for the imperial bureaucracy.
Moreover, on the basis of a highly productive economy stimulated by technological innovations, Han rulers projected Chinese influence abroad to Korea, Vietnam, and central
Asia. Thus, like classical societies in Persia, India, and the Mediterranean basin, Han China
produced a set of distinctive political and cultural traditions that shaped Chinese and
neighboring societies over the long term.

C H R O N O L O G Y
sixth century B.C.E.(?)

Laozi

551– 479 B.C.E.

Confucius

403–221 B.C.E.

Period of the Warring States

390–338 B.C.E.

Shang Yang

372–289 B.C.E.

Mencius

298–238 B.C.E.

Xunzi

280–233 B.C.E.

Han Feizi

221–207 B.C.E.

Qin dynasty

206 B.C.E.–9 C.E.

Former Han dynasty

141–87 B.C.E.

Reign of Han Wudi

9–23 C.E.

Reign of Wang Mang

25–220 C.E.

Later Han dynasty

203

ben06937.Ch08_180-205.qxd

204
F O R

PART II |

8/2/07

4:34 PM

Page 204

The Formation of Classical Societies, 500 B.C.E. to 500 C.E.

F U R T H E R

R E A D I N G

Thomas J. Barfield. The Perilous Frontier: Nomadic Empires and
China. Cambridge, Mass., 1989. A provocative analysis of
the relations between Chinese and central Asian peoples.
Derk Bodde. China’s First Unifier: A Study of the Ch’in Dynasty as
Seen in the Life of Li Ssu. Leiden, 1938. Important study of
the minister responsible for much of the Qin dynasty’s policy.
Sebastian De Grazia, ed. Masters of Chinese Political Thought from
the Beginnings to the Han Dynasty. New York, 1973. A valuable collection of primary sources in translation, all of them
bearing on political themes.
Mark Elvin. The Pattern of the Chinese Past. Stanford, 1973. A remarkable analysis of Chinese history by an economic historian who brings a comparative perspective to his work.
Cho-yun Hsu. Han Agriculture: The Formation of Early Chinese
Agrarian Economy (206 B.C.–A.D. 220). Seattle, 1980. Studies
the development of intensive agriculture in Han China and
provides English translations of more than two hundred documents illustrating the conditions of rural life.
Michael Loewe. Everyday Life in Early Imperial China. London,
1968. Deals with the social, economic, and cultural history
of China during the Han dynasty.
———. The Government of the Qin and Han Empires, 221
B.C.E.–220 C.E. Indianapolis, Ind., 2006. A reliable survey by a
leading scholar.
Victor H. Mair, trans. Tao Te Ching: The Classic Book of Integrity
and the Way. New York, 1990. A fresh and lively translation
of the Daoist classic Daodejing, based on recently discovered
manuscripts.
Victor H. Mair, Nancy S. Steinhardt, and Paul R. Goldin, eds.
Hawai`i Reader in Traditional Chinese Culture. Honolulu,

2005. An imaginative selection of primary sources in English
translation.
Frederick W. Mote. Intellectual Foundations of China. 2nd ed.
New York, 1989. A compact and concise introduction to the
cultural history of classical China.
Michele Pirazzoli-t’Serstevens. The Han Dynasty. Trans. by J. Seligman. New York, 1982. An excellent and well-illustrated survey of Han China that draws on archaeological discoveries.
Benjamin I. Schwartz. The World of Thought in Ancient China.
Cambridge, Mass., 1985. A synthesis of classical Chinese
thought by a leading scholar.
Arthur Waldron. The Great Wall of China: From History to Myth.
Cambridge, 1989. Places the modern Great Wall in the tradition of Chinese wall building from Qin times forward.
Arthur Waley, trans. The Analects of Confucius. New York, 1938.
An English version of Confucius’s sayings by a gifted translator.
———, trans. Three Ways of Thought in Ancient China. New
York, 1940. Translations and comments on works from Confucian, Daoist, and Legalist traditions.
Burton Watson, trans. Basic Writings of Mo Tzu, Hsün Tzu, and
Han Fei Tzu. New York, 1967. Translations of important political and social treatises from classical China.
———, trans. Records of the Grand Historian. Rev. ed. 2 vols.
New York, 1993. Excellent translation of Sima Qian’s history, the most important narrative source for Han China.
Wang Zhongshu. Han Civilization. Trans. by K. C. Chang. New
Haven, 1982. A scholarly work that draws on both historical
and archaeological research.

ben06937.Ch08_180-205.qxd

8/2/07

4:34 PM

Page 205


