Classical India

Page 207

The Fortunes of Empire in Classical India

Religions of Salvation in Classical India

The Mauryan Dynasty and
the Temporary Unification of India
The Emergence of Regional Kingdoms
and the Revival of Empire

Jainism and the Challenge to
the Established Cultural Order
Early Buddhism
Mahayana Buddhism
The Emergence of Popular Hinduism

Economic Development and Social Distinctions
Towns and Trade
Family Life and the Caste System

The earliest description of India by a foreigner came from the pen of a Greek ambassador
named Megasthenes. As the diplomatic representative of the Seleucid emperor, Megasthenes
lived in India for many years during the late fourth and early third centuries B.C.E., and he traveled throughout much of northern India. Although Megasthenes’ book, the Indika, has long
been lost, many quotations from it survive in Greek and Latin literature. These fragments
clearly show that Megasthenes had great respect for the Indian land, people, and society.
Like travel writers of all times, Megasthenes included a certain amount of spurious information in his account of India. He wrote, for example, of ants the size of foxes that mined
gold from the earth and fiercely defended their hoards from any humans who tried to steal
them. Only by distracting them with slabs of meat, Megasthenes said, could humans safely
make away with their treasure. He also reported races of monstrous human beings: some
with no mouth who survived by breathing in the odors of fruits, flowers, and roots, others
with feet pointing backwards and eight toes per foot, and yet others with the heads of dogs
who communicated by barking.
Beyond the tall tales, Megasthenes offered a great deal of reliable information. He portrayed India as a fertile land that supported two harvests of grain per year. He described the
capital of Pataliputra as a rectangle-shaped city situated along the Ganges River and surrounded by a moat and a massive timber wall with 570 towers and sixty-four gates. He mentioned large armies that used elephants as war animals. He pointed out the strongly
hierarchical character of Indian society (although he incorrectly held that there were seven
instead of four main castes). He noted that two main schools of “philosophers” (Hindus and
Buddhists) enjoyed special prominence as well as exemption from taxes, and he described
the ascetic lifestyles and vegetarian diets followed by particularly devout individuals. In short,
Megasthenes portrayed India as a wealthy land that supported a distinctive society with wellestablished cultural traditions.
In India as in Persia and China, the centuries after 500 B.C.E. witnessed the development
of a classical society whose influence has persisted over the centuries. Its most prominent
features were a well-defined social structure, which left individuals with few doubts about
their position and role in society, and several popular religious traditions that helped to shape
Indian beliefs and values. Two religions, Buddhism and Hinduism, also appealed strongly to
peoples beyond the subcontinent.
Efforts to maintain an imperial government did not succeed nearly as well in India as
they did in Persia and China. For the most part, classical India fell under the sway of regional

OPPOSITE:

A limestone sculpture depicts a serene Buddha as he preaches a sermon
to his followers.

207

ben06937.Ch09_206-229.qxd

208

PART II |

8/27/07

8:13 AM

Page 208

The Formation of Classical Societies, 500 B.C.E. to 500 C.E.
kingdoms rather than centralized empires. Imperial regimes were crucial for the consolidation
of Indian cultural traditions, however, because they sponsored cultural leaders and promoted
their ideals throughout the subcontinent and beyond. The spread of Buddhism is a case in
point: imperial support helped the faith secure its position in India and attract converts in
other lands. Thus, even in the absence of a strong and continuing imperial tradition like that
of Persia or China, the social and cultural traditions of classical India not only shaped the lives
and experiences of the subcontinent’s inhabitants but also influenced peoples in distant lands.

The Fortunes of Empire in Classical India
Following their migrations to India after 1500 B.C.E., the Aryans established a series
of small kingdoms throughout the subcontinent. For centuries the rulers of those
kingdoms fought constantly among themselves and sought to expand their states by
absorbing others. By the sixth century B.C.E., wars of expansion had resulted in the
consolidation of several large regional kingdoms that dominated much of the subcontinent. Despite strenuous efforts, none of these kingdoms was able to establish
hegemony over the others. During the classical era, the Mauryan and the Gupta dynasties founded centralized, imperial states that embraced much of India, but neither
empire survived long enough to establish centralized rule as a lasting feature of Indian political life.

The Mauryan Dynasty and the Temporary Unification of India

Kingdom of Magadha

Chandragupta
Maurya

The unification of India came about partly as a result of intrusion from beyond the
subcontinent. About 520 B.C.E. the Persian emperor Darius crossed the Hindu Kush
mountains, conquered parts of northwestern India, and made the kingdom of Gandhara in the northern Punjab (northern modern-day Pakistan) a province of the
Achaemenid empire. The establishment of Achaemenid authority in India introduced
local rulers to Persian techniques of administration. Almost two centuries later, in
327 B.C.E., after overrunning the Persian empire, Alexander of Macedon crossed the
Indus River and crushed the states he found there. Alexander remained in India only
for a short time, and he did not make a deep impression on the Punjabi people: he departed after his forces mutinied in the year 325 B.C.E., and contemporary Indian
sources did not even mention his name. Yet his campaign had an important effect on
Indian politics and history, since he created a political vacuum in northwestern India
by destroying the existing states and then withdrawing his forces.
Poised to fill the vacuum was the dynamic kingdom of Magadha, located in the
central portion of the Ganges plain. Several regional kingdoms in the valley of the
Ganges had become wealthy as workers turned forests into fields and trade became an
increasingly prominent feature of the local economy. By about 500 B.C.E. Magadha
had emerged as the most important state in northeastern India. During the next two
centuries, the kings of Magadha conquered the neighboring states and gained control
of Indian commerce passing through the Ganges valley as well as overseas trade between India and Burma passing across the Bay of Bengal. The withdrawal of Alexander
from the Punjab presented Magadha with a rare opportunity to expand.
During the late 320s B.C.E., an ambitious adventurer named Chandragupta Maurya
exploited that opportunity and laid the foundation for the Mauryan empire, the first
state to bring a centralized and unified government to most of the Indian subcontinent. Chandragupta began by seizing control of small, remote regions of Magadha

ben06937.Ch09_206-229.qxd

8/27/07

8:13 AM

Page 209

CHAPTER 9 |

209

Aral
Sea

Cas

Black Sea

State, Society, and the Quest for Salvation in India

p

i

an
Sea
BACTRIA

Mediterranean
Sea

P

ER

SI

nd

r

I

Pe

s ia

A

Taxila
HINDU
KUSH
GANDHARA
PUNJAB

H
Ga
n

ge

IM

A L AYA S

Sarnath
Pataliputra
AGADHA
Bodh NalaM
n da
Gaya

s

nG

us

ulf

Banaras

G

ea
d S

A

Re

G U J A R AT

Arabian Sea

D E C C A N KA
P L AT E A U

LI

Mauryan empire

N

BURMA

Bay
of
Bengal

Gupta empire
Trade routes
CEYLON
0
0

500
1000

1000

1500 mi
2000

3000 km

and then worked his way gradually toward the center. By 321 B.C.E. he had overthrown
the ruling dynasty and consolidated his hold on the kingdom. He then moved into the
Punjab and brought northwestern India under his control. Next he ventured beyond
the Indus River and conquered the Greek state in Bactria—a large region straddling
the border between modern Pakistan and Afghanistan, where Alexander of Macedon’s
Greek successors maintained a kingdom during the Seleucid era. By the end of the
fourth century B.C.E., Chandragupta’s empire embraced all of northern India from the
Indus to the Ganges.
A careful and systematic advisor named Kautalya devised procedures for the governance of Chandragupta’s realm. Some of Kautalya’s advice survives in the ancient Indian political handbook known as the Arthashastra, a manual offering detailed
instructions on the uses of power and the principles of government. The Arthashastra
outlined methods of administering the empire, overseeing trade and agriculture, collecting taxes, maintaining order, conducting foreign relations, and waging war. Kautalya also advised Chandragupta to make abundant use of spies, and he even included
prostitutes in his stable of informants. Like the emperors of Persia and China, Chandragupta and Kautalya built a bureaucratic administrative system that enabled them to implement policies throughout the state.
Tradition holds that Chandragupta abdicated his throne to become a monk and
led such an ascetic life that he starved himself to death. Whether that report is true
or not, it is certain that his son succeeded him in 297 B.C.E. and added most of southern India to the growing empire. The high point of the Mauryan empire, however,
came during the reign of Chandragupta’s grandson Ashoka.

Map 9.1 The Mauryan
and Gupta empires,
321 B.C.E.–550 C.E. The
Mauryan and Gupta dynasties
both originated in the kingdom
of Magadha. Why was this
region so important in ancient
India? What advantages did it
offer for purposes of trade and
communication with other
regions?

Chandragupta’s
Government

Ashoka Maurya

ben06937.Ch09_206-229.qxd

210

PART II |

8/27/07

8:13 AM

Page 210

The Formation of Classical Societies, 500 B.C.E. to 500 C.E.

Ashoka began his reign (268–232 B.C.E.) as a conqueror.
When he came to power, the only major region that remained
independent of the Mauryan empire was the kingdom of
Kalinga (modern Orissa) in the east-central part of the subcontinent. In fact, Kalinga was not only independent of Mauryan
rule but also actively hostile to its spread. The kingdom’s resistance created difficulties for Ashoka because Kalinga controlled
the principal trade routes, both by land and by sea, between
the Ganges plain and southern India. Thus Ashoka’s first major
undertaking as emperor was to conquer Kalinga and bring it
under Mauryan control, which he did in a bloody campaign in
260 B.C.E. By Ashoka’s estimate, 100,000 Kalingans died in the
fighting, 150,000 were driven from their homes, and untold
numbers of others perished in the ruined land.
In spite of that campaign, Ashoka is much better known as
a governor than as a conqueror. With Kalinga subdued,
Ashoka ruled almost the entire subcontinent—only the southernmost region escaped his control—and he turned his attention to the responsible government of his realm. As heir to the
administrative structure that Chandragupta and Kautalya had
instituted, Ashoka ruled through a tightly organized bureaucracy. He established his capital at the fortified city of Pataliputra (near modern Patna), where a central administration
developed policies for the whole empire. Pataliputra was a
thriving and cosmopolitan city: the Greek ambassador MegasAs a symbol of his rule, Ashoka had this sculpthenes reported that a local committee looked after the interture of four lions mounted atop a column about
ests of foreigners in the city—and also carefully observed their
20 meters (66 feet) tall. The lion capital is the
movements. Ashoka went to great pains to ensure that his local
official symbol of the modern Republic of India.
subordinates implemented his policies. A central treasury oversaw the efficient collection of taxes—a hallmark of Kautalya’s
influence—which supported legions of officials, accountants, clerks, soldiers, and
other imperial employees. Ashoka communicated his policies throughout his realm
by inscribing edicts in natural stone formations or on pillars that he ordered erected.
In these promulgations, known as the rock and pillar edicts, Ashoka issued imperial
decrees, encouraged his subjects to observe Buddhist values, and expressed his intention to serve as a fair, just, and humane ruler.
As a result of Ashoka’s policies, the various regions of India became well integrated, and the subcontinent benefited from both an expanding economy and a stable government. Ashoka encouraged the expansion of agriculture—the foundation
of the empire’s wealth—by building irrigation systems. He encouraged trade by
building roads, most notably a highway of more than 1,600 kilometers (1,000 miles)
linking Pataliputra with Taxila, the chief political and commercial center of northern
India, which offered access to Bactria, Persia, and other points west. Ashoka also
provided comforts for administrators, merchants, and other travelers by planting
banyan trees to provide shade, digging wells, and establishing inns along the roads.
Decline of the
Ashoka’s policies did not long survive his rule, nor did his empire. Ashoka died in
Mauryan Empire
232 B.C.E., and decline set in almost immediately. During its later years the Mauryan
empire suffered from acute financial and economic difficulties. The empire depended
on a strong army and a large corps of officials to administer imperial policy. Salaries for
both soldiers and bureaucrats were expensive: Megasthenes said that in times of peace,
military forces spent their time in idleness and drinking bouts while continuing to draw

ben06937.Ch09_206-229.qxd

8/27/07

8:13 AM

Page 211

CHAPTER 9 |

State, Society, and the Quest for Salvation in India

211

Archaeological excavations have unearthed parts of the defensive palisade, constructed of
timbers almost 5 meters (16 feet) tall, that surrounded Pataliputra during Mauryan times.

their pay. Eventually, those administrative costs outstripped the revenues that flowed
into the central treasury. The later Mauryan emperors often resorted to the tactic of
debasing their currency—reducing the amount of precious metal in a coin without reducing its nominal value. Because of their financial difficulties, they were unable to
hold the realm together. They maintained control of the Ganges valley for some fifty
years after Ashoka’s death, but eventually they lost their grip even on this heartland of
the Mauryan empire. By about 185 B.C.E. the Mauryan empire had disappeared.

The Emergence of Regional Kingdoms
and the Revival of Empire
Although the Mauryan empire came to an end, India did not crumble into anarchy.
Instead, local rulers formed a series of kingdoms that brought order to large regions.
Although regional kingdoms emerged throughout the subcontinent, historical records
and archaeological excavations have thrown clearest light on developments in northern
India. For almost two centuries after the collapse of the Mauryan empire, northwestern India fell under the rule of Greek-speaking conquerors from Bactria—Alexander of
Macedon’s imperial heirs who had mingled with local populations since establishing an
independent Bactrian kingdom in the third century B.C.E. Indo-Greek forces invaded

Bactrian Rule in
Northwestern India

ben06937.Ch09_206-229.qxd

212

PART II |

8/27/07

The Gupta Dynasty

Gupta (GOOP-tah)

Page 212

The Formation of Classical Societies, 500 B.C.E. to 500 C.E.

The Kushan Empire

Science and
Mathematics

8:13 AM

northern India as early as 182 B.C.E. and seized a large territory extending as far south
as Gujarat. Bactria was a thriving commercial center linking lands from China in the
east to the Mediterranean basin in the west, so Bactrian rule had the effect of promoting cross-cultural interaction and exchange in northern India. Large volumes of trade
provided sources of revenue for the Bactrian rulers, and the city of Taxila flourished
because of its strategic location on trade routes leading from northern India to Bactria.
The northern region of Gandhara became a site of intense cultural as well as commercial exchange.
Beginning in the late second century B.C.E., several groups of nomadic conquerors
from central Asia attacked Bactria and eventually put an end to the Indo-Greek kingdom there. The most successful of these conquerors were the Kushans, who ruled a
sizable empire embracing much of northern India and central Asia from about 1 to
300 C.E. Under Kanishka, the most prominent of the Kushan emperors (reigned
78–103 C.E.), the Kushan empire included modern-day Pakistan, Afghanistan, and
northern India to Gujarat and the central part of the Ganges valley. Like the IndoGreek Bactrians, the Kushans facilitated commerce between India and lands to the
north. Indeed, the Kushan empire played a crucial role in the silk roads network (discussed in chapter 12) by pacifying much of the large region between Persia and China,
thus making it possible for merchants to travel safely across long distances. On several
occasions the Kushans and other rulers of northern India faced ambitious kings who
sought to expand their realms and imitate the Mauryas by building an empire based in
the Indian subcontinent. Only with the Guptas, however, did any of them approach
the realization of their imperial ambitions.
Like the Mauryas, the Guptas based their state in Magadha, a crucial region because
of its wealth, its dominance of the Ganges valley, and its role as intermediary between
the various regions of the subcontinent. The new empire arose on foundations laid by
Chandra Gupta (not related to Chandragupta Maurya), who forged alliances with powerful families in the Ganges region and established a dynamic kingdom about the year
320 C.E. His successors, Samudra Gupta (reigned 335–375 C.E.) and Chandra Gupta II
(reigned 375– 415 C.E.), made the Magadhan capital of Pataliputra once again the center of a large empire. Between the two of them, Samudra Gupta and Chandra Gupta II
conquered many of the regional kingdoms of India, and they established tributary alliances with others that elected not to fight. Only the Deccan Plateau and the southernmost part of the subcontinent remained outside the orbit of Gupta influence.
The Gupta empire was somewhat smaller in size than the Mauryan, and it also differed considerably in organization. Ashoka had insisted on knowing the details of regional affairs, which he closely monitored from his court at Pataliputra. The Guptas
left local government and administration, and even the making of basic policy, in the
hands of their allies in the various regions of their empire. When nomadic invaders
threatened the empire during the later fifth century C.E., it split easily along the fault
lines of the administrative regions. During the late fourth and early fifth centuries
C.E., however, the Gupta dynasty brought stability and prosperity to the subcontinent. A Chinese Buddhist monk named Faxian traveled widely in India searching for
texts of the Buddhist scriptures during the reign of Chandra Gupta II. In an account
of his travels, Faxian reported that India was a prosperous land with little crime. It
was possible to travel throughout the country, he said, without fear of molestation
and even without official travel documents.
Under conditions of political stability, Gupta prosperity sustained the work of
scholars and enabled them to lay the foundations for sophisticated studies in the natural sciences and mathematics. Indian physicians developed techniques of plastic surgery, and astronomers determined that the earth is a sphere that rotates on its axis.

ben06937.Ch09_206-229.qxd

8/27/07

8:13 AM

Page 213

CHAPTER 9 |

State, Society, and the Quest for Salvation in India

Most influential of the scholars were the mathematicians. Advanced mathematics was
possible because Indian numerals included a symbol for zero, which facilitates adoption of a place-value notation system, which in turn expedites mathematical computations. It is much simpler to multiply 19 ⫻ 84, for example, than XIX ⫻ LXXXIV.
With their flexible numerals and their system of place-value notation, Indian mathematicians were able to carry out advanced algebraic calculations and anticipate the
invention of calculus. Indian mathematicians calculated the value of pi to 3.1416 and
the length of the solar year to 365.3586805 days. In the eighth century, Arab and
Persian scholars encountered Indian mathematics and readily adopted what they
called “Hindi numerals,” which Europeans later termed “Arabic numerals,” since
they learned of them through Arab Muslims.
Gupta administrative talents and cultural creativity were not a match, however,
for the invasions of the White Huns, a nomadic people from central Asia who occupied Bactria during the fourth century C.E., and then prepared to cross the Hindu
Kush mountains into India. For the first half of the fifth century, the Guptas repelled
the Huns, but the defense cost them dearly in resources and eventually weakened
their state. By the end of the fifth century, the Huns moved across the Hindu Kush
almost at will and established several kingdoms in northern and western India.
The Gupta dynasty continued in name only: regional governors progressively
usurped imperial rights and powers, and contemporary documents do not even record
the names of all the later Gupta emperors. Once again, imperial government survived
only for a short term in India. Not until the establishment of the Mughal dynasty in
the sixteenth century C.E. did any state rule as much of India as the Mauryan and
Gupta empires ruled. Memories of empire remained, to be sure, and there were periodic efforts to bring all of the subcontinent again under the control of a unified
regime. But for the most part, large regional kingdoms dominated political life in
India during the millennium between the Gupta and the Mughal dynasties.

Gupta Decline

Economic Development
and Social Distinctions
After spreading through the subcontinent, Aryan migrants turned increasingly from
herding to agriculture. After about 1000 B.C.E., when they learned the techniques of
iron metallurgy, they used iron axes and tools to advance into regions previously inaccessible to them, notably the jungle-covered valley of the Ganges River. The Aryans
dispatched shudras, semi-free serfs, to work in recently cleared fields, and from fertile
lands they reaped large harvests. Agricultural surpluses supported the large-scale
states such as the regional kingdoms and the Mauryan and Gupta empires that organized Indian public life. Agricultural surpluses also encouraged the emergence of
towns, the growth of trade, and further development of the caste system.

Towns and Trade
After about 600 B.C.E. towns dotted the Indian countryside, especially in the northwestern corner of the subcontinent. These towns served the needs of a productive agricultural society by providing manufactured products for local consumption—pots,
textiles, iron tools, and other metal utensils—as well as luxury goods such as jewelry
destined for the wealthy and elite classes. Demand for manufactured products was very
high, and some entrepreneurs organized businesses on a large scale. During Mauryan
times, for example, a pottery manufacturer named Saddalaputta owned about five

Towns and
Manufacturing

213

ben06937.Ch09_206-229.qxd

214

PART II |

8/27/07

Page 214

The Formation of Classical Societies, 500 B.C.E. to 500 C.E.

Many surviving gold
coins reflect the
commercial vitality of
northern India in the
late first and early
second centuries C.E.
This one depicts the
Buddha gesturing to
his followers.

Long-Distance Trade

Trade in the Indian
Ocean Basin

8:13 AM

hundred workshops, whose products he
distributed throughout the Ganges
valley in his fleet of boats.
Flourishing towns maintained marketplaces and encouraged the development of
trade. Within the subcontinent itself trade was most active along the Ganges River,
although trade routes also
passed through the Ganges
delta east to Burma and
down the east Indian coast
to the Deccan and southern
India. Roads built by Ashoka
also facilitated overland commerce within the subcontinent.
Meanwhile, the volume of longdistance trade also grew as large imperial states in China, southwest Asia, and the
Mediterranean basin provided a political foundation
enabling merchants to deal with their counterparts in distant lands. Direct political and
military links with foreign peoples drew Indians into long-distance commercial relations. Beginning with Cyrus, the Achaemenid rulers of Persia coveted the wealth of
India and included the northern kingdom of Gandhara as a province of their empire.
The presence of Persian administrators in India and the building of roads between Persia and India facilitated commerce between the two lands. Alexander of Macedon’s
conquests helped to establish even more extensive trade networks by forging links between India and the Mediterranean basin by way of Bactria, Persia, and Anatolia.
From India, long-distance trade passed overland in two directions: through the
Hindu Kush mountains and the Gandharan capital of Taxila to Persia and the Mediterranean basin, and across the silk roads of central Asia to markets in China. Cotton, aromatics, black pepper, pearls, and gems were the principal Indian exports, in exchange
for which Indian merchants imported horses and bullion from western lands and silk
from China.
During the Mauryan era merchants continued to use land routes, but they increasingly turned to the sea to transport their goods. Seaborne trade benefited especially
from the rhythms of the monsoon winds that govern weather and the seasons in the
Indian Ocean basin. During the spring and summer the winds blow from the southwest, and during the fall and winter they come from the northeast. Once mariners recognized these rhythms, they could sail easily and safely before the wind to any part of
the Indian Ocean basin.
As early as the fifth century B.C.E., Indian merchants had traveled to the islands of
Indonesia and the southeast Asian mainland, where they exchanged pearls, cotton,
black pepper, and Indian manufactured goods for spices and exotic local products.
Many of those goods did not remain in India but, instead, traveled west through the
Arabian Sea to the lands bordering the Persian Gulf and the Red Sea. Indian products
also found markets in the Mediterranean basin. Indian pepper became so popular there
that the Romans established direct commercial relations and built several trading settlements in southern India. Archaeologists working in southern India have unearthed
hoards of Roman coins that testify to the large volume of trade between classical India
and Mediterranean lands.

ben06937.Ch09_206-229.qxd

8/27/07

8:13 AM

Page 215

CHAPTER 9 |

State, Society, and the Quest for Salvation in India

215

Family Life and
the Caste System
In the midst of urban growth and
economic development, Indian moralists sought to promote stability by
encouraging respect for strong patriarchal families and to promote the
maintenance of a social order in which
all members played well-defined roles.
Most people lived with members of
their nuclear family. Particularly among
higher castes, however, several generations of a family often lived in large
compounds ruled by powerful patriarchs. Literary works suggest that
women were largely subordinate to
men. The two great Indian epics,
the Mahabharata and the Ramayana,
commonly portrayed women as weakwilled and emotional creatures and
exalted wives who devoted themselves to their husbands. In the Ramayana, for example, the beautiful
Sita loyally followed her husband
Buddhist art often depicted individuals as
models of proper social relationships. Here a
Rama into undeserved exile in a wild
sculpture from a Buddhist temple at Karli,
forest and remained faithful to him
produced about the first century C.E., represents
even during a long separation.
an ideal Buddhist married couple.
During the early centuries C.E.,
patriarchal dominance became more
pronounced in India. By the Gupta era child marriage was common: when girls were
age eight or nine, their parents betrothed them to men in their twenties. Formal marriage took place just after the girls reached puberty. Wives often came to dominate
domestic affairs in their households, but the practice of child marriage placed them
under the control of older men and encouraged them to devote themselves to family
matters rather than to public affairs in the larger society.
After their arrival in India, the Aryans recognized four main castes or classes of
people: brahmins (priests), kshatriyas (warriors and aristocrats), vaishyas (peasants
and merchants), and shudras (serfs). Brahmins in particular endorsed this social
order, which brought them honor, prestige, and sometimes considerable wealth as
well. The growth of trade and the proliferation of industries, however, had deep implications for the larger structure of Indian society, since they encouraged further development of the caste system.
As trade and industrial activity expanded, new groups of artisans, craftsmen, and
merchants appeared, many of whom did not fit easily in the established structure. Individuals working in the same craft or trade usually joined together to form a guild, a
corporate body that supervised prices and wages in a given industry and provided for
the welfare of members and their families. Guild members lived in the same quarter
of town, socialized with one another, intermarried, and cared for the group’s widows, orphans, and needy.
In effect, the guilds functioned as subcastes, known as jati, based on occupation.
In fact, jati assumed much of the responsibility for maintaining social order in India.

Gender Relations

Social Order

Castes and Guilds

Mahabharata (mah-hahBAH-rah-tah)
Ramayana (rah-mahyah-nah)

ben06937.Ch09_206-229.qxd

216

PART II |

8/27/07

8:13 AM

Page 216

The Formation of Classical Societies, 500 B.C.E. to 500 C.E.

Jewel-bedecked flying goddesses drop flowers on the earth from their perch in the heavens.
Their gems and personal adornments reflect the tastes of upper-class women during the
Gupta dynasty. This painting on a rock wall, produced about the sixth century C.E., survives
in modern Sri Lanka.

Wealth and the
Social Order

Jati regularly organized courts, through which they disciplined guild members, resolved differences, and regulated community affairs. Individuals who did not abide
by group rules were liable to expulsion from the community. These outcastes then
had to make their way through life—often by working as butchers, leather tanners,
or undertakers or in other occupations deemed low and unclean—without the networks of support provided by jati. Thus Indian guilds and jati performed services
that central governments provided in other lands. The tendency for individuals and
their families to associate closely with others of the same occupation remained a
prominent feature of Indian society well into modern times.
Beyond encouraging further development of the caste system, economic development in the subcontinent also generated tremendous wealth, which posed a serious
challenge to the social order that arose in India following the Aryan migrations. Traditional social theory accorded special honor to the brahmins and the kshatriyas because of the worthy lives they had led during previous incarnations and the heavy
responsibilities they assumed as priests, warriors, and rulers during their current incarnations. Members of the vaishya and shudra castes, on the other hand, merited no
special respect but, rather, had the obligation to work as directed by the higher castes.
During the centuries after 600 B.C.E., however, trade and industry brought prosperity
to many vaishyas and even shudras, who sometimes became wealthier and more influential in society than their brahmin and kshatriya contemporaries.

ben06937.Ch09_206-229.qxd

8/27/07

8:13 AM

Page 217

CHAPTER 9 |

State, Society, and the Quest for Salvation in India

A painting produced in the sixth century C.E. in the Ajanta caves of central India depicts
individuals of different castes, jati, and ethnic groups in a crowd scene.

Economic development and social change in classical India had profound implications for the established cultural as well as the social order. The beliefs, values, and rituals that were meaningful in early Aryan society seemed increasingly irrelevant during
the centuries after 600 B.C.E. Along with emerging towns, growing trade, increasing
wealth, and a developing social structure, classical India also saw the appearance of
new religions that addressed the needs of the changing times.

Religions of Salvation in Classical India
Ancient Indian religion revolved around ritual sacrifices offered by brahmin priests in
hopes that the gods would reward their loyal human servants with large harvests and
abundant herds. Because the brahmins performed services deemed crucial for the survival of society, they enjoyed exemption from taxation. They also received hefty fees
and generous gifts in return for their services. As the Indian economy developed,
however, these services seemed less meaningful, especially to the newly wealthy classes
of merchants and artisans. Many of these individuals came from the lower castes, and
they resented the brahmins’ pretensions to superiority.
During the sixth and fifth centuries B.C.E., a rash of new religions and philosophies
rejected the brahmins’ cults and appealed to the interests of new social classes. Some
of them tended toward atheistic materialism: members of the Charvaka sect, for example, believed that the gods were figments of the imagination, that brahmins were

217

ben06937.Ch09_206-229.qxd

218

PART II |

8/27/07

8:13 AM

Page 218

The Formation of Classical Societies, 500 B.C.E. to 500 C.E.

charlatans who enriched themselves
by hoodwinking others, and that
human beings came from dust and
returned to dust like any other animal in the natural world. The Charvakas’ beliefs clearly reflected the
increasingly materialistic character of
Indian society and economy. Others,
such as the Jains, the Buddhists, and
the Hindus, turned to intense spirituality as an alternative to the mechanical rituals of the brahmins.

Jainism and the Challenge
to the Established
Cultural Order
Vardhamana
Mahavira

Jainist Ethics

Jainism (JEYEN-iz'm)
ahimsa (uh-HIM-suh)

Among the most influential of the
new religions was Jainism. Although
Jainist doctrines first appeared during
the seventh century B.C.E., they became popular only when the great
teacher Vardhamana Mahavira turned
to Jainism in the late sixth century
B.C.E. Mahavira (“the great hero”)
Mahavira with one of his disciples. Represenwas born in northern India about
tations of the early Jains often depicted them in
540 B.C.E. to a prominent kshatriya
the nude because of their ascetic way of life.
family. According to the semilegendary accounts of his life, he left home
at the age of thirty to seek salvation by escaping from the cycle of incarnation. For
twelve years he led an ascetic life wandering throughout the Ganges valley, after which
he gained enlightenment. He abandoned all his worldly goods, even his clothes, and
taught an ascetic doctrine of detachment from the world. For the next thirty years,
until his death about 468 B.C.E., he expounded his thought to a group of dedicated
disciples who formed a monastic order to perpetuate and spread his message. These
disciples referred to Mahavira as Jina (“the conqueror”), and borrowing from this
title his followers referred to themselves as Jains.
Much of the inspiration for Jainist doctrine came from the Upanishads. Jains believed that everything in the universe—humans, animals, plants, the air, bodies of water,
and even inanimate physical objects such as rocks—possessed a soul. As long as they
remained trapped in terrestrial bodies, these souls experienced both physical and psychological suffering. Only by purification from selfish behavior could souls gain release
from their imprisonment, shed the burdens of karma that they had accumulated during their various incarnations, and attain a state of bliss.
Individuals underwent purification by observing the principle of ahimsa, or nonviolence to other living things or their souls. Devout Jain monks went to extremes to
avoid harming the millions of souls they encountered each day. They swept the ground
before them as they walked to avoid causing harm to invisible insects; they strained their
drinking water through cloth filters to remove tiny animals they might unwittingly consume; they followed an abstemious and strictly vegetarian diet; they even wore masks

ben06937.Ch09_206-229.qxd

8/27/07

8:13 AM

Page 219

CHAPTER 9 |

State, Society, and the Quest for Salvation in India

and avoided making sudden movements so that they would not bruise or otherwise disturb the tiny souls inhabiting the surrounding air.
Jainist ethics were so demanding that few people other than devout monks could
hope to observe them closely. The Jains believed that almost all occupations inevitably entailed violence of some kind: farming involved the killing of pests and the
harvesting of living plants, for example, and crafts such as leather tanning depended
on the slaughter of animals. Thus for most people Jainism was not a practical alternative to the religion of the brahmins.
For certain groups, however, Jainism represented an attractive alternative to the
traditional cults. Jainist values and ethics had significant social implications. If all creatures possessed souls and participated in the ultimate reality of the world, it made little
sense to draw sharp distinctions between different classes of human beings. As a result,
the Jains did not recognize social hierarchies based on varna or jati. It is not surprising, then, that their faith became popular especially among members of lower castes
who did not command much respect in the traditional social order, including merchants, scholars, and literary figures. In a typical day, individuals in these classes did
little overt violence to other creatures or their souls, and they appreciated the spiritual
sensitivity and the high moral standards that Jainism encouraged. They provided substantial lay support for the Jainist monks and helped to maintain the ideal of ahimsa as
a prominent concern of Indian ethics. Indeed, the doctrine of ahimsa has been an especially influential teaching over the long term, both in India and beyond. Quite apart
from some two million Indian individuals who maintain Jainist traditions in the present day, many Buddhists and Hindus recognize ahimsa as a fundamental element of
their beliefs, and prominent reformers of the twentieth century C.E. such as Mohandas
K. Gandhi and Martin Luther King Jr. relied on the doctrine of ahimsa when promoting social reform by nonviolent means.
In spite of the moral respect it has commanded and the influence it has wielded
through the centuries, however, Jainism has always been the faith of a small minority.
It has simply been too difficult—or even impossible—for most people to observe. A
more popular and practical alternative to the brahmins’ cults came in the form of
Buddhism.

219

Appeal of Jainism

Early Buddhism
Like Mahavira, the founder of Buddhism came from a kshatriya family, but he gave
up his position and inheritance in order to seek salvation. His name was Siddhartha
Gautama, born about 563 B.C.E. in a small tribal state governed by his father in the
foothills of the Himalayas. According to early accounts, Gautama lived a pampered
and sheltered life in palaces and parks, because his father had determined that Gautama would experience only happiness and would never know misery. He married his
cousin and excelled in the program of studies that would prepare him to succeed his
father as governor.
Eventually, however, Gautama became dissatisfied with his comfortable life. One
day, according to an early legend, while riding toward a park in his chariot, Gautama
saw a man made miserable by age and infirmity. When he asked for an explanation of
this unsettling sight, Gautama learned from his chariot driver that all human beings
grow old and weak. On later outings Gautama saw a sick man and a corpse, from
whose fates he learned that disease and death were also inevitable features of the
human condition. Finally Gautama noticed a monk traveling by foot in his distinctive
dress, and he learned that some individuals withdraw from the active life of the world
to lead holy lives and to perfect their spiritual qualities. In light of the misery he had

Siddhartha Gautama

Siddhartha Gautama (sihDHAR-tuh GOW-tau-mah)

ben06937.Ch09_206-229.qxd

220

PART II |

Gautama’s Search
for Enlightenment

The Buddha and
His Followers

Buddhist Doctrine:
The Dharma

8/27/07

8:13 AM

Page 220

The Formation of Classical Societies, 500 B.C.E. to 500 C.E.

previously witnessed, Gautama considered the monk a
noble character and determined to take up an ascetic,
wandering life for himself
in the hope that it would
help him to understand the
phenomenon of suffering.
Though not a strictly historical account, this story conveys well the Buddhist concern with suffering.
About 534 B.C.E. Gautama
left his wife, his family, and
the comforts of home to lead
the existence of a holy man.
He wandered throughout the
Ganges valley searching for
spiritual enlightenment and
an explanation for suffering.
He survived for a while by
begging for his food but then
abandoned society altogether
to live as a hermit. He sought
A painting produced in the late fifth century C.E. depicts
enlightenment first by means
the Buddha seated under a pavilion as servants attend to
of intense meditation and
his needs and anoint him with holy water.
later through the rigors of
extreme asceticism. None of
those tactics satisfied him. Then, according to Buddhist legends, as he sat one day beneath a large bo tree in Bodh Gaya, southwest of Pataliputra, Gautama decided that he
would remain exactly where he was until he understood the problem of suffering. For
forty-nine days he sat in meditation as various demons tempted him with pleasures and
threatened him with terrors in efforts to shake his resolution. Eventually the demons
withdrew, and Gautama prevailed. After forty-nine days under the bo tree, he received
enlightenment: he understood both the problem of suffering and the means by which
humans could eliminate it from the world. At that point, Gautama became the Buddha—“the enlightened one.”
The Buddha publicly announced his doctrine for the first time about 528 B.C.E. at
the Deer Park of Sarnath, near the Buddhist holy city of Banaras (modern Varanasi),
in a sermon delivered to friends who had formerly been his companions in asceticism.
Buddhists refer to this sermon as the “Turning of the Wheel of the Law” because it
represented the beginning of the Buddha’s quest to promulgate the law of righteousness. His teachings quickly attracted attention, and disciples came from all parts of the
Ganges valley. He organized them into a community of monks who owned only their
yellow robes and their begging bowls. They traveled on foot, preaching the Buddha’s
doctrine and seeking handouts for their meals. For more than forty years, the Buddha
led his disciples throughout much of northern India in hopes of bringing spiritual enlightenment to others. About 483 B.C.E., at an age of some eighty years, he died after
leaving his companions with a final message: “Decay is inherent in all component
things! Work out your salvation with diligence!”
The core of the Buddha’s doctrine, known as the Four Noble Truths, teaches that
all life involves suffering; that desire is the cause of suffering; that elimination of desire

ben06937.Ch09_206-229.qxd

8/27/07

8:13 AM

Page 221

CHAPTER 9 |

State, Society, and the Quest for Salvation in India

brings an end to suffering; and that a disciplined life conducted in accordance with the
Noble Eightfold Path brings the elimination of desire. The Noble Eightfold Path calls
for individuals to lead balanced and moderate lives, rejecting both the devotion to luxury often found in human society and the regimes of extreme asceticism favored by
hermits and Jains. Specifically, the Noble Eightfold Path demands right belief, right resolve, right speech, right behavior, right occupation, right effort, right contemplation,
and right meditation.
A moderate lifestyle characterized by quiet contemplation, thoughtful reflection,
and disciplined self-control would enable Buddhists to reduce their desires for material goods and other worldly attractions, resulting eventually in detachment from the
world itself. Ultimately, they believed that this lifestyle would lead them to personal
salvation, which for Buddhists meant escape from the cycle of incarnation and attainment of nirvana, a state of perfect spiritual independence. Taken together, the teachings of the Four Noble Truths and the Noble Eightfold Path constitute the Buddhist
dharma—the basic doctrine shared by Buddhists of all sects.
Like the Jains, the Buddhists sought to escape the cycle of incarnation without
depending on the services of the brahmins. Like the Jains, too, they did not recognize social distinctions based on caste or jati. As a result, their message appealed
strongly to members of lower castes. Because it did not demand the rigorous asceticism of Jainism, Buddhism became far more popular. Merchants were especially
prominent in the ranks of the early Buddhists, and they often used Buddhist monasteries as inns when they traveled through northern India.
Apart from the social implications of the doctrine, there were several other reasons for the immense popularity of early Buddhism in India. One has to do with language. Following the example of the Buddha himself, early Buddhist monks and
preachers avoided the use of Sanskrit, the literary language of the Vedas that the
brahmins employed in their rituals, in favor of vernacular tongues that reached a
much larger popular audience. Furthermore, early Buddhists recognized holy sites
that served as focal points for devotion. Even in the early days of Buddhism, pilgrims
flocked to Bodh Gaya, where Gautama received enlightenment, and the Deer Park
of Sarnath, where as the Buddha he preached his first sermon. Also popular with the
faithful were stupas—shrines housing relics of the Buddha and his first disciples that
pilgrims venerated while meditating on Buddhist values.
Yet another reason for the early popularity of Buddhism was the organization of
the Buddhist movement. From the days of the Buddha himself, the most enthusiastic and highly motivated converts joined monastic communities where they dedicated their lives to the search for enlightenment and salvation. Gifts and grants from
pious lay supporters provided for the land, buildings, finances, and material needs of
the monasteries. The monks themselves spent much of their time preaching, explaining the dharma to lay audiences, and encouraging their listeners to follow the Noble
Eightfold Path in their daily lives. Over time, Buddhist monasteries became important institutions in Indian society. They served as banks for their communities, and
they helped organize life in the Indian countryside by allocating their lands to individuals or groups of cultivators. Thus, during the centuries following the Buddha’s
death, monasteries wielded enormous social and economic as well as cultural influence in India.
The early Buddhist movement also benefited from the official patronage and support of the Mauryan dynasty. The precise reason for Ashoka’s conversion to Buddhism is unclear. Early legends held that a devout Buddhist monk brought about
Ashoka’s conversion by dazzling him with supernatural powers. Ashoka’s own account, as preserved in one of his edicts, explains that the emperor adopted Buddhism
about 260 B.C.E. after the war against Kalinga. Saddened by the violence of the war

221

Appeal of Buddhism

Ashoka’s Support

ben06937.Ch09_206-229.qxd

222

PART II |

8/27/07

8:13 AM

Page 222

The Formation of Classical Societies, 500 B.C.E. to 500 C.E.

The famous Buddhist stupa at Sanchi, originally built by Ashoka and enlarged in later times.

and the suffering of the Kalingans, Ashoka said that he decided to pursue his aims
henceforth by means of virtue, benevolence, and humanity rather than arms. Quite
apart from his sincere religious convictions, it is also likely that Ashoka found Buddhism appealing as a faith that could lend unity to his culturally diverse and far-flung
realm. In any case, in honor of ahimsa, the doctrine of nonviolence, Ashoka banned
animal sacrifices in Pataliputra, gave up his beloved hunting expeditions, and eliminated most meat dishes from the tables of his court. Ashoka rewarded Buddhists with
grants of land, and he encouraged them to spread their faith throughout India. He
built monasteries and stupas and made pilgrimages to the holy sites of Buddhism.
Ashoka also sent missionaries to Bactria and Ceylon (modern Sri Lanka), thus inaugurating a process by which Buddhism attracted large followings in central Asia, east
Asia, and southeast Asia.

Mahayana Buddhism
From its earliest days Buddhism attracted merchants, artisans, and others of low rank
in the traditional Indian social order. Its appeal was due both to its disregard for social classes and to its concern for ethical behavior instead of complicated ceremonies
that seemed increasingly irrelevant to the lives and experiences of most people. Yet,
even though it vastly simplified religious observances, early Buddhism made heavy
demands on individuals seeking to escape from the cycle of incarnation. A truly righ-

ben06937.Ch09_206-229.qxd

8/27/07

8:13 AM

Page 223

CHAPTER 9 |

State, Society, and the Quest for Salvation in India

teous existence involved considerable sacrifice: giving up
personal property, forsaking the search for social standing,
and resolutely detaching oneself from the charms of family
and the world. The earliest Buddhists thought that numerous physical incarnations, stretching over thousands of
years, might be necessary before an individual soul would
become pure enough to achieve salvation and pass into nirvana. Though perhaps more attractive than the religion of
the brahmins, Buddhism did not promise to make life easy
for its adherents.
Between the third century B.C.E. and the first century
C.E., however, three new developments in Buddhist thought
and practice reduced obligations of believers, opened new
avenues to salvation, and brought explosive popularity to the
faith. In the first place, whereas the Buddha had not considered himself divine, some of his later followers began to worship him as a god. Thus Buddhism acquired a devotional
focus that helped converts channel their spiritual energies
and identify more closely with their faith. In the second
place, theologians articulated the notion of the boddhisatva
(“an enlightened being”). Boddhisatvas were individuals
who had reached spiritual perfection and merited the reward
of nirvana, but who intentionally delayed their entry into nirvana to help others who were still struggling. Some theologians taught that boddhisatvas could even perform good
deeds on behalf of their less spiritually inclined brethren. Like
King Ashoka erected
Christian saints, boddhisatvas served as examples of spiritual
many stone pillars
excellence, and they provided a source of inspiration. Finally,
such as this handsome
Buddhist monasteries began to accept gifts from wealthy incolumn, which stands
dividuals and to regard the bequests as acts of generosity that
10 meters (32 feet) tall,
merited salvation. Thus wealthy individuals could enjoy the
to promote Buddhist
teachings, direct
comforts of the world, avoid the sacrifices demanded by early
travelers to holy sites,
Buddhist teachings, and still ensure their salvation.
or commemorate
Because these innovations opened the road to salvation
significant events of
for large numbers of people, their proponents called their
the Buddha’s life.
faith the Mahayana (“the greater vehicle,” which could carry
more people to salvation), as opposed to the Hinayana (“the
lesser vehicle”), a pejorative term for the earlier and stricter doctrine known also as
Theravada Buddhism. During the early centuries C.E., Mahayana Buddhism spread
rapidly throughout India and attracted many converts from lay and wealthy classes. In
later centuries Mahayana Buddhism became established also in central Asia, China,
Japan, and Korea. The stricter Theravada faith did not disappear: it remained the dominant school of Buddhism in Ceylon, and in later centuries it spread also to Burma,
Thailand, and other parts of southeast Asia. Since the first century C.E., however, most
of the world’s Buddhists have sought to ride the greater vehicle to salvation.
Mahayana Buddhism flourished partly because of educational institutions that efficiently promoted the faith. During the Vedic era, Indian education was mostly an informal affair involving a sage and his students. When Jains and Buddhists organized
monasteries, however, they began to offer regular instruction and established educational institutions. Most monasteries provided basic education, and larger communities
offered advanced instruction as well. Best known of all was the Buddhist monastery at

223

Development
of Buddhism

The Spread of
Mahayana Buddhism

Nalanda
bodhisattvas (BOH-dihSAT-vuhs)
Mahayana (mah-huhYAH-nah)

ben06937.Ch09_206-229.qxd

224

PART II |

8/27/07

8:13 AM

Page 224

The Formation of Classical Societies, 500 B.C.E. to 500 C.E.

Sources from the Past
Ashoka as a Teacher of Humility and Equality according to the Ashokavadana
Following Ashoka’s death, many legends circulated about the emperor, his life, his rule, and his devotion to Buddhism.
About the second century C.E., anonymous editors collected many of those legends in a work known as the Ashokavadana
(The Legend of Ashoka). Though not historically reliable, the legend is valuable as a work showing how later generations
revered Ashoka and made a hero of the Buddhist emperor. The following selection celebrates Ashoka’s efforts to promote
the Buddhist values of humility and the equality of believers in spite of their different caste origins.
Not long after King Ashoka had come to have faith in
the Teaching of the Buddha, he started honoring Buddhist monks, throwing himself at their feet wherever
he saw them, in a crowd, or in a deserted place.
Now Ashoka had a minister named Yasas, and although he had the utmost faith in the Blessed One [the
Buddha], he said, one day, to the king: “Your majesty,
you ought not to prostrate yourself before wandering
mendicants of every caste, and the Buddhist monks do
come from all four castes.”
To this Ashoka did not immediately respond. Sometime later, however, he told all his ministers that he
needed to have the heads of various sorts of creatures,
and he asked one of them to bring him the head of such
and such an animal, and another to bring him the head
of another animal, and so on. Finally, he ordered Yasas
to bring him the head of a human being.
Now when the ministers had gathered all these
heads, Ashoka ordered them to go to the market place
and sell them. Soon, all of the heads had been sold, except Yasas’s human head that no one would buy. Ashoka
then told Yasas to give his head away, but, even though
it was gratis, still no one would take it.
Ashamed at his lack of success, Yasas came back to
Ashoka and said: “O king, the heads of cows, asses,
sheep, deer, and birds—all were sold to people for a
price; but no one would take this worthless human head,
even free of charge.”

“Why is that?” Ashoka asked his minister, “why
wouldn’t anyone accept this human head?”
“Because it disgusted them,” Yasas replied.
“Oh?” said the king, “is it just this head that is disgusting or the heads of all human beings?”
“The heads of all humans,” answered Yasas.
“What?” said Ashoka, “is my head disgusting as
well?”
Out of fear, Yasas did not want to tell him the real
fact of the matter, but the king ordered him to speak
the truth, and finally he answered: “Yes.”
After forcing this admission out of his minister,
Ashoka then revealed to him his purpose in doing so:
“You, sir, are obsessed with matters of form and superiority, and because of this attachment you seek to dissuade me from bowing down at the feet of the monks.
But if I acquire some merit by bowing down a head so
disgusting that no one on earth would take it, even free
of charge, what harm is there in that? You, sir, look at
the caste (jati) and not at the inherent qualities of the
monks. Haughty, deluded, and obsessed with caste, you
harm yourself and others.”
FOR FURTHER REFLECTION

In what ways and for what reasons might this story from
the Ashokavadana have appealed to various groups of
early Buddhists?

SOURCE:

John S. Strong. The Legend of King Ashoka: A Study and Translation of the Ashokavadana.
Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1983, pp. 234–36. (Translation slightly modified.)

Nalanda, founded during the Gupta dynasty in the Ganges River valley near Pataliputra. At Nalanda it was possible to study not only Buddhism but also the Vedas, Hindu
philosophy, logic, mathematics, astronomy, and medicine. Nalanda soon became so famous as an educational center that pilgrims and students from foreign lands traveled
there to study with the most renowned masters of Buddhist doctrine. By the end of
the Gupta dynasty, several thousand students may have been in residence there.

ben06937.Ch09_206-229.qxd

8/27/07

8:13 AM

Page 225

CHAPTER 9 |

State, Society, and the Quest for Salvation in India

225

The Emergence of Popular Hinduism
As Buddhism generated new ideas and attracted widespread
popular interest, Hinduism underwent a similar evolution
that transformed it into a popular religion of salvation.
While drawing inspiration from the Vedas and the Upanishads, popular Hinduism increasingly departed from the
older traditions of the brahmins. Like Mahayana Buddhism,
Hinduism experienced changes in doctrine and observances
that resulted in a faith that addressed the interests and met
the needs of ordinary people.
The great epic poems, the Mahabharata and the Ramayana, illustrate the development of Hindu values. Both
works originated as secular tales transmitted orally during
the late years of the Vedic age (1500–500 B.C.E.). Brahmin
scholars revised them and committed them to writing probably during the early centuries C.E. The Mahabharata dealt
with a bloody civil war for the control of northern India
between two groups of cousins. Though originally a purely
Carving of a bodsecular work, the brahmins made a prominent place in the
dhisatva from the
poem for the god Vishnu, the preserver of the world who
second or third cenintervened frequently on behalf of virtuous individuals.
tury C.E. This carving
The Ramayana was originally a love and adventure
perhaps represents
story involving the trials faced by the legendary Prince
Avalokitesvara, also
Rama and his loyal wife, Sita. Rama went to great lengths
known as the Lord of
to rescue Sita after the demon king of Ceylon kidnapped
Compassion. Almost
her, and his alliance with Hanuman, general of the monas perfect as the Budkeys, led to exciting clashes with his enemies. Later brahdha, Avalokitesvara
min editors made Rama an incarnation of Vishnu, and they
had a reputation for
portrayed Rama and Sita as the ideal Hindu husband and
protecting merchants
and sailors, helping
wife, devoted and loyal to each other even in times of imwomen conceive, and
mense difficulty.
turning enemies into
A short poetic work known as the Bhagavad Gita (“song
kindhearted friends.
of the lord”) best illustrates both the expectations that Hinduism made of individuals and the promise of salvation that
it held out to them. The Gita was the work of many hands, and the date of its composition is uncertain. Scholars have placed it at various points between 300 B.C.E. and
300 C.E., and it most likely underwent several rounds of revision before taking on its
final form about 400 C.E. Yet it eloquently evokes the cultural climate of India between the Mauryan and the Gupta dynasties.
The work is a self-contained episode of the Mahabharata. It presents a dialogue
between Arjuna, a kshatriya warrior about to enter battle, and his charioteer Krishna,
who was in fact a human incarnation of the god Vishnu. The immediate problem addressed in the work was Arjuna’s reluctance to fight: the enemy included many of his
friends and relatives, and even though he recognized the justice of his cause, he shrank
from the conflict. In an effort to persuade the warrior to fight, Krishna presented Arjuna with several lines of argument. In the first place, he said, Arjuna must not worry
about harming his friends and relatives, because the soul does not die with the human
body. Arjuna’s weapons did not have the power to touch the soul, so he could never
harm or kill another person in any meaningful way.

The Epics

The Bhagavad Gita

Vishnu (VISH-noo)
Bhagavad Gita (BUHguh-vahd GEE-tuh)

ben06937.Ch09_206-229.qxd

226

PART II |

Hindu Ethics

Popularity of
Hinduism

8/27/07

8:13 AM

Page 226

The Formation of Classical Societies, 500 B.C.E. to 500 C.E.

Krishna also held that Arjuna’s caste imposed specific moral duties and social responsibilities upon him. The duty of shudras was to serve, of vaishyas to work, of
brahmins to learn the scriptures and seek wisdom. Similarly, Krishna argued, the duty
of kshatriyas was to govern and fight. Indeed, Krishna went further and held that an
individual’s social responsibilities had spiritual significance. He told Arjuna that failure to fulfill caste duties was a grievous sin, whereas their observance brought spiritual benefits.
Finally, Krishna taught that Arjuna would attain everlasting peace and blessedness
if he devoted himself to the love, adoration, and service of Krishna himself. Arjuna
should abandon his selfish and superficial personal concerns and surrender to the
deeper wisdom of the god. As a reward, wholehearted worship would bring Arjuna
eternal salvation through unity with his god. Alongside understanding of the soul
and caste duties, then, unquestioning faith and devotion would put Arjuna in the
proper state of mind for the looming conflict by aligning his actions with divine wisdom and will. Krishna’s teaching that faith would bring salvation helped inspire a
tradition of ecstatic and unquestioning devotion in popular Hinduism.
Hindu ethics thus differed considerably from those of earlier Indian moralists. The
Upanishads had taught that only through renunciation and detachment from the world
could individuals escape the cycle of incarnation. As represented in the Bhagavad Gita,
however, Hindu ethical teachings made life much easier for the lay classes by holding
out the promise of salvation precisely to those who participated actively in the world
and met their caste responsibilities. To be sure, Krishna taught that individuals should
meet their responsibilities in detached fashion: they should not become personally or
emotionally involved in their actions, and they especially should not strive for material
reward or recognition. Rather, they should perform their duties faithfully, concentrating on their actions alone, with no thought as to their consequences.
Other works by early Hindu moralists acknowledged even more openly than did
the Bhagavad Gita that individuals could lead honorable lives in the world. Indeed,
Hindu ethics commonly recognized four principal aims of human life: dharma (obedience to religious and moral laws), artha (the pursuit of economic well-being and
honest prosperity), kama (the enjoyment of social, physical, and sexual pleasure),
and moksha (the salvation of the soul). According to Hindu moral precepts, a proper
balance of dharma, artha, and kama would help an individual to attain moksha.
As devotional Hinduism evolved and became increasingly distinct from the teachings of the Upanishads and the older traditions of the brahmins, it also enhanced its
appeal to all segments of Indian society. Hinduism offered salvation to masses of people who, as a matter of practical necessity, had to lead active lives in the world and
thus could not even hope to achieve the detachment envisioned in the Upanishads.
Hinduism gradually displaced Buddhism as the most popular religion in India.
Buddhism remained strong through much of the first millennium C.E., and until about
the eleventh century pilgrims traveled to India from as far away as China to visit the
holy sites of Buddhism and learn about the faith in its original homeland. Within
India, however, Buddhism grew remote from the popular masses. Later Buddhist
monks did not seek to communicate their message to the larger society in the zealous
way of their predecessors, but increasingly confined themselves to the comforts of
monasteries richly endowed by wealthy patrons.
Meanwhile, devotional Hinduism also attracted political support and patronage,
particularly from the Gupta emperors. The Guptas and their successors bestowed
grants of land on Hindu brahmins and supported an educational system that promoted Hindu values. Just as Ashoka Maurya had advanced the cause of Buddhism,

ben06937.Ch09_206-229.qxd

8/27/07

8:13 AM

Page 227

CHAPTER 9 |

State, Society, and the Quest for Salvation in India

227

Sources from the Past
Caste Duties according to the Bhagavad Gita
In urging Arjuna to enter battle, Krishna pointed out that Arjuna could not harm the immortal souls of his family
and friends on the other side. Beyond that, however, Krishna emphasized the duty to fight that Arjuna inherited as a
member of the kshatriya caste. Yet Krishna also counseled Arjuna to perform his duty in a spirit of detachment, not
caring for victory or defeat.
As a man, casting off old clothes, puts on others and new
ones, so the embodied self, casting off old bodies, goes
to others and new ones. Weapons do not divide the self
into pieces; fire does not burn it; waters do not moisten
it; the wind does not dry it up. It is not divisible; it is
not combustible; it is not to be moistened; it is not to
be dried up. It is everlasting, all-pervading, stable, firm,
and eternal. It is said to be unperceived, to be unthinkable, to be unchangeable. Therefore knowing it to be
such, you ought not to grieve. But even if you think that
the self is constantly born, and constantly dies, still, O
you of mighty arms, you ought not to grieve thus. For
to one that is born, death is certain; and to one that dies,
birth is certain. Therefore about this unavoidable thing,
you ought not to grieve. . . .
Having regard to your own duty, you ought not to
falter, for there is nothing better for a kshatriya than a
righteous battle. Happy those kshatriyas who can find
such a battle—an open door to heaven! But if you will
not fight this righteous battle, then you will have abandoned your own duty and your fame, and you will incur
sin. All beings, too, will tell of your everlasting infamy;
and to one who has been honored, infamy is a greater
evil than death. Warriors who are masters of great chariots will think that you have abstained from the battle
through fear, and having been highly thought of by
them, you will fall down to littleness. Your enemies, too,
decrying your power, will speak much about you that

should not be spoken. And what, indeed, could be more
lamentable than that? Killed, you will obtain heaven; victorious, you will enjoy the earth. Therefore arise, resolved to engage in battle. Looking on pleasure and
pain, on gain and loss, on victory and defeat as the same,
prepare for battle, and thus you will not incur sin. . . .
The state of mind that consists in firm understanding regarding steady contemplation does not belong to
those who are strongly attached to worldly pleasures and
power, and whose minds are drawn away by that flowery talk that is full of specific acts for the attainment of
pleasures and power, and that promises birth as the fruit
of actions—that flowery talk uttered by unwise ones
who are enamored of Vedic words, who say there is
nothing else, who are full of desires, and whose goal is
heaven. . . .
Your business is with action alone, not by any means
with the fruit of the action. Let not the fruit of action
be your motive to action. Let not your attachment be
fixed on inaction. Having recourse to devotion, perform
actions, casting off all attachment, and being equable in
success or ill success.
FOR FURTHER REFLECTION

How do these reflections on caste duties and detachment in the Bhagavad Gita compare and contrast with
the moral and ethical teachings of Zarathustra and Confucius discussed in earlier chapters?

SOURCE: The Bhagavad Gita. Trans. by Kashinath Trimbak Telang. In F. Max Müller, ed., The Sacred Books
of the East, vol. 8. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1908, pp. 45–48. (Translation slightly modified.)

the Guptas and their successors later helped Hinduism become the dominant religious and cultural tradition in India. By about 1000 C.E., Buddhism had entered a
noticeable decline in India while Hinduism grew in popularity. Within a few centuries devotional Hinduism and the more recently introduced faith of Islam almost
completely eclipsed Buddhism in its homeland.

ben06937.Ch09_206-229.qxd

228

PART II |

8/27/07

8:13 AM

Page 228

The Formation of Classical Societies, 500 B.C.E. to 500 C.E.

I

n India, as in classical Persia and China, a robust agricultural economy supported the
creation of large-scale states and interregional trade. Although an imperial state did not

become a permanent feature of Indian political life, the peoples of the subcontinent maintained an orderly society based on the caste system and regional states. Indian cultural
and religious traditions reflected the conditions of the larger society in which they developed. Mahayana Buddhism and devotional Hinduism in particular addressed the needs of
the increasingly prominent lay classes, and the two faiths profoundly influenced the religious life of Asian peoples over the long term of history.

C H R O N O L O G Y
563–483 B.C.E.

Life of Siddhartha Gautama, the Buddha

540–468 B.C.E.

Life of Vardhamana Mahavira

520 B.C.E.

Invasion of India by Darius of Persia

327 B.C.E.

Invasion of India by Alexander of Macedon

321–185 B.C.E.

Mauryan dynasty

321–297 B.C.E.

Reign of Chandragupta Maurya

268–232 B.C.E.

Reign of Ashoka Maurya

182 B.C.E.–1 C.E.

Bactrian rule in northern India

1–300 C.E.

Kushan empire in northern India and central Asia

78–103 C.E.

Reign of Kushan emperor Kanishka

320–550 C.E.

Gupta dynasty

F O R

F U R T H E R

R E A D I N G

Roy C. Amore and Larry D. Shinn. Lustful Maidens and Ascetic
Kings. New York, 1981. Translations of stories and moral
tales from Hindu and Buddhist writings.
Jeannine Auboyer. Daily Life in Ancient India. Trans. by S. W.
Taylor. New York, 1965. An excellent and well-researched,
though somewhat dated, introduction to Indian social history
during the classical era.
A. L. Basham. The Wonder That Was India. New York, 1954.
Popular survey by a leading scholar of early Indian history.
Edward Conze. Buddhism: Its Essence and Development. New
York, 1959. Systematic account of Buddhism from a theological point of view.
William Theodore De Bary, ed. Sources of Indian Tradition. 2 vols.
2nd ed. New York, 1988. Important collection of sources in
translation.

Kautalya. The Kautilya Arthashastra. 3 vols. 2nd ed. Ed. by R. P.
Kangle. Bombay, 1960–69. Translation of the most important political treatise of classical India.
Xinru Liu. Ancient India and Ancient China: Trade and Religious Exchanges, A.D. 1–600. Delhi, 1988. Important study
exploring the early spread of Buddhism from India to central
Asia and China.
Juan Mascaró, trans. The Bhagavad Gita. Harmondsworth, 1962.
Brilliant and evocative English version by a gifted translator.
William H. McNeill and Jean W. Sedlar, eds. Classical India. New
York, 1969. Collection of primary sources in translation.
Gregory Schopen. Buddhist Monks and Business Matters: Still More
Papers on Monastic Buddhism in India. Honolulu, 2004. Focuses on the social and economic dimensions of early Buddhist
monasticism.

ben06937.Ch09_206-229.qxd

8/27/07

8:13 AM

Page 229

CHAPTER 9 |

Jean W. Sedlar. India and the Greek World: A Study in the Transmission of Culture. Totowa, N.J., 1980. Important study of
relations between India and Greece, based on solid research.
K. M. Sen. Hinduism. London, 2005. Reissue of a classic interpretation with a new foreword by Amartya Sen drawing out
the contemporary implications of the study.
John S. Strong. The Legend of King Ashoka: A Study and Translation of the Ashokavadana. Princeton, 1983. Valuable translation of an important early Buddhist account of King Ashoka’s
life and reign.

State, Society, and the Quest for Salvation in India

229

Romila Thapar. Ashoka and the Decline of the Mauryas. London,
1961. The best scholarly study of Ashoka and his reign.
———. Early India: From the Origins to A.D. 1300. Berkeley,
2003. A fresh view by one of the leading scholars of early Indian history.
Mortimer Wheeler. Flames over Persepolis. New York, 1968. Examines the influence of Greek and Persian traditions in northern India after the time of Alexander of Macedon.
Stanley Wolpert. A New History of India. 7th ed. New York, 2004.
A concise and readable survey of Indian history.


