Greece 


Page 230

Mediterranean Society:
The Greek Phase

ben06937.Ch10_230-257.qxd

8/27/07

8:14 AM

Page 231

Early Development of Greek Society
Minoan and Mycenaean Societies
The World of the Polis

The Fruits of Trade:
Greek Economy and Society
Trade and the Integration of the Mediterranean Basin
Family and Society

Greece and the Larger World
Greek Colonization
Conflict with Persia
The Macedonians and the Coming of Empire
The Hellenistic Empires

The Cultural Life of Classical Greece
Rational Thought and Philosophy
Popular Religion and Greek Drama
Hellenistic Philosophy and Religion

For a man who perhaps never existed, Homer has been a profoundly influential figure. According to tradition, Homer composed the two great epic poems of ancient Greece, the Iliad
and the Odyssey. In fact, scholars now know that bards recited both poems for generations
before Homer lived—the mid-eighth century B.C.E., if he was indeed a historical figure. Some
experts believe that Homer was not a real man so much as a convenient name for several
otherwise anonymous scribes who committed the Iliad and the Odyssey to writing. Others believe that a man named Homer had a part in preparing a written version of the epics, but
that others also contributed significantly to his work.
Whether Homer ever really lived or not, the epics attributed to him deeply influenced the
development of classical Greek thought and literature. The Iliad offered a Greek perspective
on a campaign waged by a band of Greek warriors against the city of Troy in Anatolia during
the twelfth century B.C.E. The Odyssey recounted the experiences of the Greek hero Odysseus
as he sailed home after the Trojan war. The two works described scores of difficulties faced
by Greek warriors—not only battles with Trojans but also challenges posed by deities and
monsters, conflicts among themselves, and even psychological barriers that individuals had
to surmount. Between them, the two epics preserved a rich collection of stories that literary
figures mined for more than a millennium, reworking Homer’s material and exploring his
themes from fresh perspectives.
Quite apart from their significance as literary masterpieces, the Iliad and the Odyssey also
testify to the frequency and normality of travel, communication, and interaction in the Mediterranean basin during the second and first millennia B.C.E. Both works portray Greeks as expert
and fearless seamen, almost as comfortable aboard their ships as on land, who did not hesitate to venture into the waters of what Homer called the “wine-dark sea” in pursuit of their
goals. Homer lovingly described the sleek galleys in which Greek warriors raced across the
waters, sometimes to plunder the slower but heavily laden cargo vessels that plied the Mediterranean sea lanes, more often to launch strikes at enemy targets. He even had Odysseus construct a sailing ship single-handedly when he was shipwrecked on an island inhabited only by
a goddess. The Iliad and the Odyssey make it clear that maritime links touched peoples throughout the Mediterranean basin in Homer’s time and, further, that Greeks were among the most
prominent seafarers of the age.
Already during the second millennium B.C.E., Phoenician merchants had established links
between lands and peoples at the far ends of the Mediterranean Sea. During the classical era,
however, the Mediterranean basin became much more tightly integrated as Greeks, and later

OPPOSITE:

The theater at Delphi.

231

ben06937.Ch10_230-257.qxd

232

PART II |

8/27/07

8:14 AM

Page 232

The Formation of Classical Societies, 500 B.C.E. to 500 C.E.
Romans as well, organized commercial exchange and sponsored interaction throughout the region. Under Greek and Roman supervision, the Mediterranean served not as a barrier but,
rather, as a highway linking Anatolia, Egypt, Greece, Italy, France, Spain, north Africa, and even
southern Russia (by way of routes through the Black Sea).
Ancient Greece differed from classical societies in other lands. Early in the classical era, the
Greeks lived in autonomous city-states. Only after the late third century B.C.E. did they play
prominent roles in the large, centralized empire established by their neighbors to the north in
Macedon. Yet from the seventh through the second centuries B.C.E., the Greeks integrated the
societies and economies of distant lands through energetic commercial activity over the
Mediterranean sea lanes. They also generated a remarkable body of moral thought and philosophical reflection. Just as the traditions of classical Persia, China, and India shaped the cultural
experiences of those lands, the traditions of the Greeks profoundly influenced the long-term
cultural development of the Mediterranean basin, Europe, and southwest Asia as well.

Early Development of Greek Society
Humans inhabited the Balkan region and the Greek peninsula from an early but indeterminate date. During the third millennium B.C.E., they increasingly met and mingled with peoples from different societies who traveled and traded in the Mediterranean
basin. As a result, early inhabitants of the Greek peninsula built their societies under
the influence of Mesopotamians, Egyptians, Phoenicians, and others active in the region. Beginning in the ninth century B.C.E., the Greeks organized a series of city-states,
which served as the political context for the development of classical Greek society.

Minoan and Mycenaean Societies
Knossos

Decline of
Minoan Society

During the late third millennium B.C.E., a sophisticated society arose on the island of
Crete. Scholars refer to it as Minoan society, after Minos, a legendary king of ancient
Crete. Between 2000 and 1700 B.C.E., the inhabitants of Crete built a series of lavish
palaces throughout the island, most notably the enormous complex at Knossos decorated with vivid frescoes depicting Minoans at work and play. These palaces were the
nerve centers of Minoan society: they were residences of rulers, and they also served as
storehouses where officials collected taxes in kind from local cultivators. Palace officials
devised a script known as Linear A, in which written symbols stood for syllables rather
than words, ideas, vowels, or consonants. Although linguists have not yet been able to
decipher Linear A, it is clear that Cretan administrators used the script to keep detailed
records of economic and commercial matters.
Between 2200 and 1450 B.C.E., Crete was a principal center of Mediterranean
commerce. Because of its geographic location in the east-central Mediterranean, Crete
received early influences from Phoenicia and Egypt. By 2200 B.C.E. Cretans were traveling aboard advanced sailing craft of Phoenician design. Minoan ships sailed to
Greece, Anatolia, Phoenicia, and Egypt, where Cretan wine, olive oil, and wool were
exchanged for grains, textiles, and manufactured goods. Archaeologists have discovered pottery vessels used as storage containers for Minoan wine and olive oil as far
away as Sicily. After 1600 B.C.E. Cretans established colonies on Cyprus and many islands in the Aegean Sea, probably to mine local copper ores and gain better access to
markets where tin was available.
After 1700 B.C.E. Minoan society experienced a series of earthquakes, volcanic
eruptions, and tidal waves. Most destructive was a devastating volcanic eruption

ben06937.Ch10_230-257.qxd

8/27/07

8:14 AM

Page 233

CHAPTER 10 |

Mediterranean Society: The Greek Phase

233

A magnificent fresco
from the town of
Akrotiri on the island
of Thera depicts a
busy harbor, showing
that Akrotiri traded
actively with Crete
and other Minoan
sites. The volcanic
eruption of Thera
about 1628 B.C.E.
destroyed Akrotiri.

about 1628 B.C.E. on the island of Thera (Santorini) north of Crete. Between 1600
and 1450 B.C.E., Cretans embarked on a new round of palace building to replace
structures destroyed by those natural catastrophes: they built luxurious complexes
with indoor plumbing and drainage systems and even furnished some of them with
flush toilets. After 1450 B.C.E., however, the wealth of Minoan society attracted a series of invaders, and by 1100 B.C.E. Crete had fallen under foreign domination. Yet
the Minoan traditions of maritime trade, writing, and construction deeply influenced
the inhabitants of nearby Greece.
Beginning about 2200 B.C.E. migratory Indo-European peoples filtered over the
Balkans and into the Greek peninsula. By 1600 B.C.E. they had begun to trade with
Minoan merchants and visit Crete, where they learned about writing and large-scale
construction. They adapted Minoan Linear A to their language, which was an early
form of Greek, and devised a syllabic script known as Linear B. After 1450 B.C.E.
they also built massive stone fortresses and palaces throughout the southern part of
the Greek peninsula, known as the Peloponnesus. Because the fortified sites offered
protection, they soon attracted settlers who built small agricultural communities.
Their society is known as Mycenaean, after Mycenae, one of their most important
settlements.
From 1500 to 1100 B.C.E., the Mycenaeans expanded their influence beyond
peninsular Greece. They largely overpowered Minoan society, and they took over the
Cretan palaces, where they established craft workshops. Archaeologists have unearthed thousands of clay tablets in Linear B that came from the archives of Mycenaean rulers in Crete as well as peninsular Greece. The Mycenaeans also established
settlements in Anatolia, Sicily, and southern Italy.
About 1200 B.C.E. the Mycenaeans engaged in a conflict with the city of Troy in
Anatolia. This Trojan war, which Homer recalled from a Greek perspective in his
Iliad, coincided with invasions of foreign mariners in the Mycenaean homeland. Indeed, from 1100 to 800 B.C.E. chaos reigned throughout the eastern Mediterranean
region. Invasions and civil disturbances made it impossible to maintain stable governments or even productive agricultural societies. Mycenaean palaces fell into ruin, the

Mycenaean Society

Chaos in the Eastern
Mediterranean

Mycenaean (meye-sehNEE-uhn)

ben06937.Ch10_230-257.qxd

234

PART II |

8/27/07

8:14 AM

Page 234

The Formation of Classical Societies, 500 B.C.E. to 500 C.E.

population sharply declined, and people abandoned most settlements. Many
inhabitants of the Greek peninsula
fled to the islands of the Aegean Sea,
Anatolia, or Cyprus. Writing in both
Linear A and Linear B disappeared.
The boisterous character of the era
comes across clearly in Homer’s works.
Though set in an earlier era, both the
Iliad and the Odyssey reflect the tumultuous centuries after 1100 B.C.E.
They portray a society riven with conflict, and they recount innumerable
episodes of aggression, treachery, and
violence alongside heroic bravery and
courage.

The World of the Polis
The Polis

Sparta

In the absence of a centralized state
or empire, local institutions took the
lead in restoring political order in
Greece. The most important institution was the city-state, or polis. The
term polis originally referred to a
citadel or fortified site that offered
refuge for local communities during
times of war or other emergencies.
These sites attracted increasing popThe Lion Gate at Mycenae illustrates the heavy
fortifications built by Myceneans to protect their
ulations, and many of them gradually
settlements.
became lively commercial centers.
They took on an increasingly urban
character and extended their authority over surrounding regions. They levied taxes on
their hinterlands and appropriated a portion of the agricultural surplus to support the
urban population. By about 800 B.C.E. many poleis (the plural of polis) had become
bustling city-states that functioned as the principal centers of Greek society.
The poleis took various political forms. Some differences reflected the fact that
poleis emerged independently and elaborated their traditions with little outside influence. Others arose from different rates of economic development. A few poleis developed as small monarchies, but most were under the collective rule of local
notables. Many fell into the hands of generals or ambitious politicians—called
“tyrants” by the Greeks—who gained power by irregular means. (The tyrants were
not necessarily oppressive despots: indeed, many of them were extremely popular
leaders. The term tyrant referred to their routes to power rather than their policies.)
The most important of the poleis were Sparta and Athens, whose contrasting constitutions illustrate the variety of political styles in classical Greece.
Sparta was situated in a fertile region of the Peloponnesus. As their population
and economy expanded during the eighth and seventh centuries B.C.E., the Spartans
progressively extended their control over the Peloponnesus. In doing so, they re-

ben06937.Ch10_230-257.qxd

8/27/07

8:14 AM

Page 235

CHAPTER 10 |

0

100

50

235

150 mi
200

100

0

Mediterranean Society: The Greek Phase

300 km

S ea of
Marm ar a

MACEDON
t

He

lle

sp

on

Mt. Olympus

Troy

Aegean
S e a LESBOS

Ionian
Sea

A N ATO L I A
IO

Thermopylae

Corinth
Mycenae

Thebes
Athens
Salamis

A
N I

Delphi

CHIOS

Marathon
SAMOS

AT TI CA

P E LO P O N N E S U S
DELOS

Sparta
Mycenaean society

Halicarnassus

LACON IA

Minoan society
THERA

Sea of Crete
CRETE

RHODES

Knossos

Mycenae
Sea of Crete
Knossos

Mediterranean Sea

CRETE

duced neighboring peoples to the status of helots, servants of the Spartan state. Although they were not chattel slaves, the helots also were not free. They could form
families, but they could not leave the land. Their role in society was to provide agricultural labor and keep Sparta supplied with food. By the sixth century B.C.E., the
helots probably outnumbered the Spartan citizens by more than ten to one. With
their large subject population, the Spartans were able to cultivate the Peloponnesus
efficiently, but they also faced the constant threat of rebellion. As a result, the Spartans devoted most of their resources to maintaining a powerful and disciplined military machine.
In theory, Spartan citizens were equal in status. To discourage the development of
economic and social distinctions, Spartans observed an extraordinarily austere lifestyle
as a matter of policy. They did not wear jewelry or elaborate clothes, nor did they pamper themselves with luxuries or accumulate private wealth on a large scale. They generally did not even circulate coins made of precious metals but, instead, used iron bars

Map 10.1 Classical
Greece, 800–350 B.C.E. Note
the mountainous topography
of the Greek peninsula and
western Anatolia. To what extent did geography encourage
Greeks to venture into the
Mediterranean Sea?

Spartan Society

ben06937.Ch10_230-257.qxd

236

PART II |

8/27/07

8:14 AM

Page 236

The Formation of Classical Societies, 500 B.C.E. to 500 C.E.
A painted cup produced in Sparta about 550 B.C.E. depicts hunters
attacking a boar. Spartans regarded hunting as an exercise that
helped to sharpen fighting skills and aggressive instincts.

Athens

Athenian Society

for money. It is for good reason, then, that the adjective
spartan refers to a lifestyle characterized by simplicity,
frugality, and austerity.
Distinction among the ancient Spartans came not
by wealth or social status, but by prowess, discipline,
and military talent, which the Spartan educational system cultivated from an early age. All boys from families
of Spartan citizens left their homes at age seven and went
to live in military barracks, where they underwent a rigorous regime of physical training. At age twenty they began
active military service, which they continued until retirement.
Spartan authorities also prescribed vigorous physical exercise for
girls in hopes that they would bear strong children. When they
reached age eighteen to twenty, young women married and had occasional sexual relations, but did not live with their husbands. Only at about age thirty
did men leave the barracks and set up households with their wives and children.
By the fourth century B.C.E., Spartan society had lost much of its ascetic rigor.
Aristocratic families had accumulated great wealth, and Spartans had developed a
taste for luxury in food and dress. Nevertheless, Spartan society stood basically on
the foundation of military discipline, and its institutions both reflected and reinforced the larger society’s commitment to military values. In effect, Sparta sought to
maintain public order—and discourage rebellion by the helots—by creating a military state that could crush any threat.
In Athens as in Sparta, population growth and economic development caused
political and social strain, but the Athenians relieved tensions by establishing a government based on democratic principles. Whereas Sparta sought to impose order by
military means, Athens sought to negotiate order by considering the interests of the
polis’s various constituencies. Citizenship was by no means open to all residents:
only free adult males from Athens played a role in public affairs, leaving foreigners,
slaves, and women with no direct voice in government. In seeking to resolve social
problems, Athenians opened government offices to all citizens and broadened the
base of political participation in classical Greece.
During the seventh century B.C.E., an increasing volume of maritime trade brought
prosperity to Attica, the region around Athens. The principal beneficiaries of that prosperity were aristocratic landowners, who also controlled the Athenian government. As
their wealth grew, the aristocrats increased their landholdings and cultivated them with
greater efficiency. Owners of small plots could not compete and fell heavily into debt.
Competitive pressures often forced them to sell their holdings to aristocrats, and debt
burdens sometimes overwhelmed them and pushed them into slavery.
By the early sixth century B.C.E., Attica had a large and growing class of people extremely unhappy with the structure of their society and poised to engage in war against
their wealthy neighbors. Many poleis that experienced similar economic conditions
suffered decades of brutal civil war between aristocrats and less privileged classes. In
Athens, however, an aristocrat named Solon served as a mediator between classes, and
he devised a solution to class conflict in Attica.

ben06937.Ch10_230-257.qxd

8/27/07

8:14 AM

Page 237

CHAPTER 10 |

Mediterranean Society: The Greek Phase

Solon forged a compromise between the classes. He
allowed aristocrats to keep
their lands—rather than confiscate them and redistribute
them to landless individuals,
as many of the less privileged
preferred—but he cancelled
debts, forbade debt slavery,
and liberated those already
enslaved for debt. To ensure
that aristocrats would not undermine his reforms, Solon
also provided representation
for the common classes in
the Athenian government by
opening the councils of the
polis to any citizen wealthy
enough to devote time to
public affairs, regardless of
his lineage. Later reformers
went even further. During
the late sixth and fifth centuries B.C.E., Athenian leaders increased opportunities
for commoners to participate
in government, and they paid
The image of Pericles, wearing a helmet that symbolizes
salaries to officeholders so fihis post as Athenian leader, survives in a Roman copy of a
nancial hardship would not
Greek statue.
exclude anyone from service.
Those reforms gradually
transformed Athens into a democratic state. The high tide of Athenian democracy
came under the leadership of the statesman Pericles. Though he was of aristocratic
birth, Pericles was the most popular Athenian leader from 461 B.C.E. until his death in
429 B.C.E. He wielded enormous personal influence in a government with hundreds
of officeholders from the common classes, and he supported building programs that
provided employment for thousands of construction workers and laborers. Under the
leadership of Pericles, Athens became the most sophisticated of the poleis, with a vibrant community of scientists, philosophers, poets, dramatists, artists, and architects.
Little wonder, then, that in a moment of civic pride, Pericles boasted that Athens was
“the education of Greece.”

Greece and the Larger World
As the poleis prospered, Greeks became increasingly prominent in the larger world of
the Mediterranean basin. They established colonies along the shores of the Mediterranean and the Black Sea, and they traded throughout the region. Eventually, their political and economic interests brought them into conflict with the expanding Persian
empire. During the fifth century B.C.E., a round of intermittent war between the Greeks

237

Solon and Athenian
Democracy

Pericles

ben06937.Ch10_230-257.qxd

238

PART II |

8/27/07

8:14 AM

Page 238

The Formation of Classical Societies, 500 B.C.E. to 500 C.E.

Da
R h on e

AT L A N T IC
OCE A N

Olbia

Heraclea
at

i

CORSICA

Blac

dr

Massalia

A

Tarraco

e

Po

Tiber

IBERIA

nub

Saguntum

ic

Se

a

k Sea

Phasis

Byzantium

Neapolis

SARDINIA

dite

rrane

IA

Me

A N AT O L I A

N

Thebes
Messana Delphi
Athens
Corinth
Olympia
Sparta
Syracuse

SICILY

AFRICA

Aegean
Sea

Ionian
Sea

IO

Tyrrhenean
Sea

RHODES

Salamis

CRETE
CYPRUS

an Sea

Cyrene

Greek colonies

Naucratis
500

250

0

500

Map 10.2 Classical
Greece and the Mediterranean basin, 800–500 B.C.E.
All the Greek colonies were
located on the coastlines of the
Mediterranean Sea and the
Black Sea. In what ways did the
colonies serve as links between
Greece and the larger Mediterranean region?

Greek Colonies

EGYPT

750 mi
1000

1500 km

Nile

0

Memphis

Re d
Se a

and the Persians ended in stalemate, but in the next century Alexander of Macedon
toppled the Achaemenid empire. Indeed, Alexander built an empire stretching from
India to Egypt and Greece. His conquests created a vast zone of trade and communication that encouraged commercial and cultural exchange on an unprecedented scale.

Greek Colonization
By about 800 B.C.E. the poleis were emerging as centers of political organization in
Greece. During the next century increasing population strained the resources available in the rocky and mountainous Greek peninsula. To relieve population pressures,
the Greeks began to establish colonies in other parts of the Mediterranean basin. Between the mid-eighth and the late sixth centuries B.C.E., they founded more than four
hundred colonies along the shores of the Mediterranean Sea and the Black Sea.
The Greeks established their first colonies in the central Mediterranean during the
early eighth century B.C.E. The most popular sites were Sicily and southern Italy, particularly the region around modern Naples, which was itself originally a Greek colony
called Neapolis (“new polis”). These colonies provided merchants not only with fertile fields that yielded large agricultural surpluses but also with convenient access to
the copper, zinc, tin, and iron ores of central Italy. By the sixth century B.C.E., Greek
colonies dotted the shores of Sicily and southern Italy, and more Greeks lived in these
colonies than in the Greek peninsula itself. By 600 B.C.E. the Greeks had ventured
even farther west and established the important colony of Massalia (modern Marseilles) in what is now southern France.
Greek colonies arose also in the eastern Mediterranean and the Black Sea. Hundreds
of islands in the Aegean Sea beckoned to a maritime people such as the Greeks.
Colonists also settled in Anatolia, where their Greek cousins had established communities during the centuries of political turmoil after 1100 B.C.E. During the eighth and

ben06937.Ch10_230-257.qxd

8/27/07

8:14 AM

Page 239

CHAPTER 10 |

Mediterranean Society: The Greek Phase

seventh centuries B.C.E.,
Greeks ventured into the
Black Sea in large numbers
and established colonies all
along its shores. These settlements offered merchants
access to rich supplies of
grain, fish, furs, timber,
honey, wax, gold, and amber as well as slaves captured in southern Russia
and transported to markets
in the Mediterranean.
Unlike their counterparts in classical Persia,
Two Greek ships under sail, a merchant vessel (left) and a
China, and India, the Greeks
galley (right) powered by oars as well as sails.
did not build a centralized
imperial state. Greek colonization was not a process controlled by a central government so much as an ad hoc
response of individual poleis to population pressures. Colonies often did not take
guidance from the poleis from which their settlers came but, rather, relied on their
own resources and charted their own courses.
Nevertheless, Greek colonization sponsored more communication, interaction,
and exchange than ever before among Mediterranean lands and peoples. From the
early eighth century B.C.E., colonies facilitated trade between their regions and the
poleis in peninsular Greece and Anatolia. At the same time, colonization spread Greek
language and cultural traditions throughout the Mediterranean basin. Moreover, the
Greek presence quickened the tempo of social life, especially in the western Mediterranean and the Black Sea. Except for a few urban districts surrounding Phoenician
colonies in the western Mediterranean, these regions were home mostly to small-scale
agricultural societies organized by clans. As Greek merchants brought wealth into these
societies, local clan leaders built small states in areas such as Sicily, southern Italy, southern France, the Crimean peninsula, and southern Russia where trade was especially
strong. Thus Greek colonization had important political and social effects throughout
the Mediterranean basin.

Effects of Greek
Colonization

Conflict with Persia
During the fifth century B.C.E., their links abroad brought the poleis of the Greek
peninsula into direct conflict with the Persian empire in a long struggle known as the
Persian Wars (500–479 B.C.E.). As the Persian emperors Cyrus and Darius tightened
their grip on Anatolia, the Greek cities on the Ionian coast became increasingly restless. In 500 B.C.E. they revolted against Persian rule and expelled the Achaemenid
administrators. In support of their fellow Greeks and commercial partners, the Athenians sent a fleet of ships to aid the Ionian effort. Despite that gesture, Darius repressed the Ionian rebellion by 493 B.C.E.
To punish the Athenians and forestall future interference in Persian affairs, Darius then mounted a campaign against peninsular Greece. In 490 B.C.E. he sent an
army and a fleet of ships to attack Athens. Although greatly outnumbered, the Athenians routed the Persian army at the battle of Marathon and then marched back to
Athens in time to fight off the Persian fleet.

The Persian Wars

239

ben06937.Ch10_230-257.qxd

240

PART II |

The Delian League

The Peloponnesian
War

8/27/07

8:14 AM

Page 240

The Formation of Classical Societies, 500 B.C.E. to 500 C.E.

Ten years later Darius’s successor, Xerxes, decided to avenge the Persian losses.
In 480 B.C.E. he dispatched a force consisting of perhaps one hundred thousand
troops and a fleet of one thousand ships to subdue the Greeks. The Persian army
succeeded in capturing and burning Athens, but a Greek fleet led by Athenians shattered the Persian navy at the battle of Salamis. Xerxes himself viewed the conflict
from a temporary throne set up on a hillside overlooking the narrow strait of water
between Athens and the island of Salamis. The following year a Greek force at Plataea
routed the Persian army, whose survivors retreated to Anatolia.
Greeks and Persians continued to skirmish intermittently for more than a century, although their conflict did not expand into full-scale war. The Persian rulers
were unwilling to invest resources in the effort to conquer small and distant Greece,
and after Xerxes’ reign they faced domestic problems that prevented them from
undertaking foreign adventures. For their part, the Greeks had neither the resources
nor the desire to challenge the Persian empire, and they remained content with maintaining their independence.
Once the Persian threat subsided, however, serious conflict arose among the
Greek poleis themselves. After the Persian Wars, the poleis created an alliance known
as the Delian League to discourage further Persian actions in Greece. Because of its
superior fleet, Athens became the leader of the alliance. In effect, Athens supplied
the league’s military force, and the other poleis contributed financial support, which
went largely to the Athenian treasury. Indeed, those contributions financed much of
the Athenian bureaucracy and the vast construction projects that employed Athenian
workers during the era of Pericles’ leadership. In the absence of a continuing Persian
threat, however, the other poleis resented having to make contributions that seemed
to benefit only the Athenians.
Ultimately, the tensions resulted in a bitter and destructive civil conflict known as
the Peloponnesian War (431–404 B.C.E.). Both in peninsular Greece and throughout
the larger Greek world, poleis divided into two armed camps under the leadership of
Athens and Sparta, the most powerful of the poleis and the principal contenders for
hegemony in the Greek world. The fortunes of war favored first one side, then the
other, but by 404 B.C.E. the Spartans and their allies had forced the Athenians to unconditional surrender. Sparta’s victory soon generated new jealousies, however, and
conflicts broke out again. During the decades following Athenian surrender, hegemony in the Greek world passed to Sparta, Thebes, Corinth, and other poleis.
The Peloponnesian War was both a debilitating and a demoralizing conflict. The
historian Thucydides wrote a detailed history of the war, and even though he was
himself a loyal native of Athens, he did not hide the fact that Athenians as well as
other parties to the conflict adopted brutal tactics. Athenians bullied smaller communities, disregarded the interests and concerns of other poleis, insisted that allies resolutely toe the Athenian line, and subjected insubordinate communities to severe
punishments. When the small island of Melos refused to acknowledge the authority of
Athens, for example, Thucydides reported that Athenian forces conquered the island,
massacred all the men of military age, and sold the women and children into slavery.
As a result of that and other atrocities, Athens lost its reputation as the moral and intellectual leader of the Greek people and gained notoriety as an arrogant, insensitive
imperialist power. Meanwhile, as the Peloponnesian War divided and weakened the
world of the Greek poleis, a formidable power took shape to the north.

The Macedonians and the Coming of Empire
The Kingdom
of Macedon

Until the fourth century B.C.E., the kingdom of Macedon was a frontier state north of
peninsular Greece. The Macedonian population consisted partly of cultivators and

ben06937.Ch10_230-257.qxd

8/27/07

8:14 AM

Page 241

CHAPTER 10 |

Mediterranean Society: The Greek Phase

241

Pericles organized the construction of numerous marble buildings, partly with funds collected from poleis belonging to
the Delian League. Most notable of his projects was the Parthenon, a temple dedicated to the goddess Athena, which
symbolizes the prosperity and grandeur of classical Athens.

partly of sheepherders who migrated seasonally between the mountains and the valleys.
Although the Macedonians recognized a king, semiautonomous clans controlled political affairs.
Proximity to the wealthy poleis of Greece brought change to Macedon. From the
seventh century B.C.E., the Greek cities traded with Macedon. They imported grain,
timber, and other natural resources in exchange for olive oil, wine, and finished products. Macedonian political and social elites, who controlled trade from their side of
the border, became well acquainted with Greek merchants and their society.
During the reign of King Philip II (359–336 B.C.E.), Macedon underwent a thorough transformation. Philip built a powerful military machine that enabled him to
overcome the traditional clans and make himself the ruler of Macedon. His military
force featured an infantry composed of small landowners and a cavalry staffed by
aristocrats holding large estates. During the fourth century B.C.E., both elements
proved to be hardy, well trained, and nearly invincible.
When Philip had consolidated his hold on Macedon, he turned his attention to two
larger prizes: Greece and the Persian empire. During the years following 350 B.C.E.,
Philip moved into northern Greece, annexing poleis and their surrounding territories. The poleis recognized the Macedonian threat, but the Peloponnesian War had
poisoned the atmosphere so much that the poleis could not agree to form an alliance
against Philip. Thus as he moved into Greece, Philip faced nothing more than small
forces patched together by shifting and temporary alliances. By 338 B.C.E. he had
overcome all organized resistance and brought Greece under his control.
Philip intended to use his conquest of Greece as a launching pad for an invasion
of Persia. He did not have the opportunity to carry out his plans, however, because
an assassin brought him down in 336 B.C.E. The invasion of Persia thus fell to his
son, the young Alexander of Macedon, often called Alexander the Great.
At the age of twenty, Alexander succeeded Philip as ruler of an expanding empire.
He soon began to assemble an army of about forty-eight thousand men to invade the
Persian empire. Alexander was a brilliant strategist and an inspired leader, and he inherited a well-equipped, well-disciplined, highly spirited veteran force from his father. By

Philip of Macedon

Alexander
of Macedon

Alexander’s
Conquests

ben06937.Ch10_230-257.qxd

242

PART II |

8/27/07

8:14 AM

Page 242

The Formation of Classical Societies, 500 B.C.E. to 500 C.E.

333 B.C.E. Alexander had subjected
Ionia and Anatolia to his control;
within another year he held Syria,
Palestine, and Egypt; by 331 B.C.E. he
controlled Mesopotamia and prepared
to invade the Persian homeland. He
took Pasargadae and burned the
Achaemenid palace at Persepolis late
in 331 B.C.E., and he pursued the
dispirited Persian army for another
year until the last Achaemenid ruler
fell to an assassin. Alexander established himself as the new emperor of
Persia in 330 B.C.E.
By 327 B.C.E. Alexander had larger
Wearing a lion skin around his head, Alexander
ambitions: he took his army into Inthe warrior plunges into battle with Persian
dia and crossed the Indus River, enforces in this carving from his sarcophagus.
tering the Punjab. He subjected local
rulers and probably would have continued to campaign in India except that his troops refused to proceed any farther
from home. By 324 B.C.E. Alexander and his army had returned to Susa in Mesopotamia, where they celebrated their exploits in almost continuous feasting. Alexander busied himself with plans for governing his empire and for conducting further
explorations. In June of 323 B.C.E., however, after an extended round of feasting and
drinking, he suddenly fell ill and died at age thirty-three.
During the course of a meteoric career, Alexander proved to be a brilliant conqueror, but he did not live long enough to construct a genuine state for his vast realm
or to develop a system of administration. He established cities throughout the lands he
conquered and reportedly named about seventy of them Alexandria in his own honor.
Alexander also toyed with some intriguing ideas about governing his empire, notably a
scheme to marry his officers to Persian women and create a new ruling class of Greek,
Macedonian, and Persian ancestry, but his early death prevented him from turning that
plan into a coherent policy. So long as he lived, he relied on established institutions
such as the Persian satrapies to administer the lands he conquered.

The Hellenistic Empires

The Hellenistic Era

When Alexander died, his generals jockeyed for position in hopes of taking over choice
parts of his realm, and by 275 B.C.E. they had divided the empire into three large
states. Antigonus took Greece and Macedon, which his Antigonid successors ruled
until the Romans established their authority in the eastern Mediterranean during the
second century B.C.E. Ptolemy took Egypt, which the Ptolemaic dynasty ruled until
the Roman conquest of Egypt in 31 B.C.E. Seleucus took the largest portion, the former Achaemenid empire stretching from Bactria to Anatolia, which his Seleucid successors ruled until the Parthians displaced them during the second century B.C.E.
Historians refer to the age of Alexander and his successors as the Hellenistic age—
an era when Greek cultural traditions expanded their influence beyond Greece (Hellas) to a much larger world. During the centuries between Alexander’s death and the
expansion of the Roman empire in the eastern Mediterranean, the Hellenistic empires
governed cosmopolitan societies and sponsored interactions between peoples from
Greece to India. Like imperial states in classical Persia, China, and India, the Hellenis-

ben06937.Ch10_230-257.qxd

8/27/07

8:14 AM

Page 243

CHAPTER 10 |

Mediterranean Society: The Greek Phase

243

Sources from the Past
Arrian on the Character of Alexander of Macedon
One of the earliest surviving accounts of Alexander’s life and career is that of Flavius Arrianus Xenophon, better known
as Arrian. Although Greek, Arrian served in the armies of the early Roman empire and developed a strong interest in
military history. About the middle of the second century C.E., he composed his work on Alexander, drawing on contemporary accounts that no longer survive. Here he assesses Alexander’s character.
He had great personal beauty, invincible power of endurance, and a keen intellect; he was brave and adventurous, strict in the observance of his religious duties,
and hungry for fame. Most temperate in the pleasures
of the body, his passion was for glory only, and in that
he was insatiable. He had an uncanny instinct for the
right course in a difficult and complex situation, and was
most happy in his deductions from observed facts. In
arming and equipping troops and in his military dispositions he was always masterly. Noble indeed was his
power of inspiring his men, of filling them with confidence, and, in the moment of danger, of sweeping away
their fear by the spectacle of his own fearlessness. When
risks had to be taken, he took them with the utmost
boldness, and his ability to seize the moment for a swift
blow, before his enemy had any suspicion of what was
coming, was beyond praise. No cheat or liar ever caught
him off his guard, and both his word and his bond were
inviolable. Spending but little on his own pleasures, he
poured out his money without stint for the benefit of
his friends.
Doubtless, in the passion of the moment Alexander
sometimes erred; it is true that he took some steps towards the pomp and arrogance of the Asiatic kings: but
I, at least, cannot feel that such errors were very heinous,
if the circumstances are taken fairly into consideration.
For, after all, he was young; the chain of his successes
was unbroken, and, like all kings, past, present, and to
come, he was surrounded by courtiers who spoke to
please, regardless of what evil their words might do. On
the other hand, I do indeed know that Alexander, of all
the monarchs of old, was the only one who had the nobility of heart to be sorry for his mistakes . . .
. . . As for his reputed heavy drinking, Aristoboulos
[one of Alexander’s generals who composed an account of the conqueror that was available to Arrian but

that does not survive] declares that his drinking bouts
were prolonged not for their own sake—for he was
never, in fact, a heavy drinker—but simply because he
enjoyed the companionship of his friends.
Anyone who belittles Alexander has no right to do
so on the evidence only of what merits censure in him;
he must base his criticism on a comprehensive view of
his whole life and career. But let such a person, if blackguard Alexander he must, first compare himself with
the object of his abuse: himself, so mean and obscure,
and, confronting him, the great King with his unparalleled worldly success, the undisputed monarch of two
continents [Europe and Asia], who spread the power of
his name over all the earth. Will he dare to abuse him
then, when he knows his own littleness and the triviality of his own pursuits, which, even so, prove too much
for his ability?
It is my belief that there was in those days no nation,
no city, no single individual beyond the reach of Alexander’s name; never in all the world was there another like
him, and therefore I cannot but feel that some power
more than human was concerned in his birth; indications of this were, moreover, said to be provided at the
time of his death by oracles; many people saw visions
and had prophetic dreams; and there is the further evidence of the extraordinary way in which he is held, as
no mere man could be, in honour and remembrance.
Even today, when so many years have passed, there have
been oracles, all tending to his glory, delivered to the
people of Macedon.
FOR FURTHER REFLECTION

On the basis of Arrian’s characterization, do you think
Alexander had strong potential to become an effective
governor as well as a talented conqueror?

SOURCE: Arrian. The Campaigns of Alexander. Trans. by Aubrey de Sélincourt. Rev. by J. R. Hamilton.
London: Penguin, 1971, pp. 395–98.

tic empires helped to integrate the economies and societies of distant regions. They
facilitated trade, and they made it possible for beliefs, values, and religions to spread
over greater distances than ever before.

ben06937.Ch10_230-257.qxd

Page 244

The Formation of Classical Societies, 500 B.C.E. to 500 C.E.

0

.

CRETE

Mediterranean Sea

Eu

CYPRUS

Aral Sea

ri

PALESTINE
Memphis
EGYPT

BACTRIA
ph

ra

tes

AM

3000 km

Sea

Ti g

Athens

US
MT
NS

2000

1000

an

Aegean
Sea

CAS

1500 mi

s

Sparta

C

CAU

Black Sea

N IA

spi

Se
a

O
ED

Ca

Ad
ria
tic

MA

0

1000

500

IA

PERSIA
Pasargadae
Persepolis

Susa
Babylon

Ni

Per
s

le

ian

HINDU
KUSH

H
us

PART II |

8:14 AM

IM

AL

nd

244

8/27/07

I

AY

AS

PU NJAB

Gu
lf

Re

ARABIA

d

INDIA

Se

a

Alexander’s empire
Alexander’s route

Arabian Sea

Map 10.3 Alexander’s empire, ca. 323 B.C.E. Compare the boundaries of Alexander’s empire with those of the Achaemenid empire
as depicted in Map 7.1. How was Alexander able to bring such extensive territories under his control?

The Antigonid Empire

The Ptolemaic Empire

Alexandria

Ptolemaic (TAWL-ohmay-ihk)

Although the Antigonid realm of Greece and Macedon was the smallest of the Hellenistic empires, it benefited handsomely from the new order. There was continual tension between the Antigonid rulers and the Greek cities, which sought to retain their
independence by forming defensive leagues that stoutly resisted Antigonid efforts to
control the Greek peninsula. The poleis often struck bargains with the Antigonids, offering to recognize their rule in exchange for tax relief and local autonomy. Internal
social tensions also flared, as Greeks wrestled with the perennial problem of land and
its equitable distribution. Yet cities such as Athens and Corinth flourished during the
Hellenistic era as enormous volumes of trade passed through their ports. Moreover,
the overpopulated Greek peninsula sent large numbers of colonists to newly founded
cities, especially in the Seleucid empire.
Perhaps the wealthiest of the Hellenistic empires was Ptolemaic Egypt. Greek and
Macedonian overlords did not interfere in Egyptian society, but contented themselves
with the efficient organization of agriculture, industry, and tax collection. They maintained the irrigation networks and monitored the cultivation of crops and the payment
of taxes. They also established royal monopolies over the most lucrative industries,
such as textiles, salt making, and the brewing of beer.
Much of Egypt’s wealth flowed to the Ptolemaic capital of Alexandria. Founded
by Alexander at the mouth of the Nile, Alexandria served as the Ptolemies’ administrative headquarters, but it became much more than a bureaucratic center. Alexandria’s enormous harbor was able to accommodate 1,200 ships simultaneously, and the
city soon became the most important port in the Mediterranean. Its wealth attracted

ben06937.Ch10_230-257.qxd

8/27/07

8:14 AM

Page 245

CHAPTER 10 |

0

CAS

Aegean

A N AT O L I A

ra

tes

Babylon

M E S O P O TA M I A
Susa

Per
s

N

il

e

PE

Memphis
EGYPT

BACTRIA

ian

HINDU
KUSH

Pasargadae
Persepolis

RS

IA

nd

us

H

IM

AL

PU NJAB

AY

AS

I

TI N

ES
PA
L

Alexandria

ph

ris

CYPRUS

Eu

E

IA

Mediterranean Sea

rtes

Ox

Ti g

SYRIA

N

CRETE

xa

Ai Khanum

IO

Athens Sea
Sparta

Ja

3000 km

us

.

Sea

US
MT
NS

an

MA

Black Sea

ON

spi

D
CE

1500 mi
2000

1000

Aral
Sea

Ca

Se
a

CAU

1000

500

0

Ad
ria
tic

245

Mediterranean Society: The Greek Phase

Gu
lf

Re

ARABIA

INDIA

d
Se

Ptolemaic empire

a

Antigonid empire

Arabian Sea

Seleucid empire

Map10.4 The Hellenistic empires, ca. 275 B.C.E. Note the differences in size between the three Hellenistic empires.
Consider the geographical conditions and economic potential of the three empires.

migrants from all parts of the Mediterranean basin and beyond. Alongside Greeks,
Macedonians, and Egyptians lived sizable communities of Phoenicians, Jews, Arabs,
and Babylonians. The city was indeed an early megalopolis, where peoples of different
ethnic, religious, and cultural traditions conducted their affairs. Under the Ptolemies,
Alexandria also became the cultural capital of the Hellenistic world. It was the site of
the famous Alexandrian Museum—a state-financed institute of higher learning where
philosophical, literary, and scientific scholars carried on advanced research—and of
the equally famous Alexandrian Library, which supported the scholarship sponsored
by the museum and which, by the first century B.C.E., boasted a collection of more
than seven hundred thousand works.
It was in the Seleucid realm, however, that Greek influence reached its greatest extent. The principal channels of that influence were the numerous cities that Alexander
and his successors founded in the former Persian empire. Most of them were small
settlements intended to serve as fortified sites or administrative centers, though some
developed into thriving commercial centers. Greek and Macedonian colonists flocked
to these cities, where they joined the ranks of imperial bureaucrats and administrators.
Though few in number compared with the native populations, the colonists created a
Mediterranean-style urban society that left its mark on lands as distant as Bactria and
India. Emperor Ashoka of India had his edicts promulgated in Greek and Aramaic, the
two most commonly used languages of the Hellenistic empires.
Archaeological excavations have thrown considerable light on one of those Greek
settlements—the Hellenistic colony at Ai Khanum on the Oxus River in ancient Bactria

The Seleucid Empire

Greeks in Bactria

ben06937.Ch10_230-257.qxd

246

PART II |

8/27/07

8:14 AM

Page 246

The Formation of Classical Societies, 500 B.C.E. to 500 C.E.

(modern-day Afghanistan). The colony at Ai Khanum was founded either by Alexander
of Macedon or by Seleucus shortly after Alexander’s death. As an integral part of the Seleucid empire, Bactria was in constant communication with Greece and the Mediterranean world. After about 250 B.C.E. the governors of Bactria withdrew from the
Seleucid empire and established an independent Greek kingdom. Excavations at Ai
Khanum show that the colony’s inhabitants spoke the Greek language, dressed according to Greek fashions, read Greek literature and philosophy, and constructed buildings
and produced works of art in Greek styles. At the same time, while honoring Greek
gods at Greek shrines, residents of Ai Khanum also welcomed Persian and central Asian
deities into their midst. Indeed, some Greeks even converted to Buddhism. Most prominent of the converts was King Menander, who ruled in Bactria approximately 160 to
135 B.C.E. In many ways, like the Achaemenids before them, the Hellenistic ruling
classes constituted a thin, supervisory veneer over long-established societies that largely
continued to observe inherited customs. Nevertheless, like classical states in Persia,
China, and India, the Hellenistic empires brought distant lands into interaction by way
of trade and cultural exchange.

The Fruits of Trade: Greek Economy and Society
The geography of the Greek peninsula posed difficult challenges for its inhabitants:
its mountainous terrain and rocky soil yielded only small harvests of grain, and the
southern Balkan mountains hindered travel and communication. Indeed, until the
construction of modern roads, much of Greece was more accessible by sea than by
land. As a result, early Greek society depended heavily on maritime trade.

Trade and the Integration of the Mediterranean Basin
Trade

Commercial
and Economic
Organization

Although it produced little grain, much of Greece is ideally suited to the cultivation
of olives and grapes. After the establishment of the poleis, the Greeks discovered that
they could profitably concentrate their efforts on the production of olive oil and
wine. Greek merchants traded these products around the Mediterranean, returning
with abundant supplies of grain and other items as well.
By the early eighth century B.C.E., trade had generated considerable prosperity in
the Greek world. Merchants and mariners linked Greek communities throughout the
Mediterranean world—not only those in the Greek peninsula but also those in Anatolia, the Mediterranean islands, and the Black Sea. The populations of all these communities grew dramatically, encouraging further colonization. In the colonies
merchants offered Greek olive oil and wine for local products. Grain came from Egypt,
Sicily, and southern Russia, salted fish from Spain and Black Sea lands, timber and
pitch from Macedon, tin from Anatolia, and slaves from Egypt and Russia. Merchant
ships with a capacity of four hundred tons were common in the classical Mediterranean, and a few vessels had a capacity of one thousand tons. Some cities, such as
Athens and Corinth, relied more on commerce than on agriculture for their livelihood and prosperity.
Large volumes of trade promoted commercial and economic organization in the
Mediterranean basin. In Greece, for example, shipowners, merchants, and moneylenders routinely formed partnerships to spread the risks of commercial ventures.
Usually, a merchant borrowed money from a banker or an individual to purchase
cargo and rented space from a shipowner, who transported the goods and returned
the profits to the merchant. In the event of a shipwreck, the contract became void,

ben06937.Ch10_230-257.qxd

8/27/07

8:14 AM

Page 247

CHAPTER 10 |

Mediterranean Society: The Greek Phase

leaving both the merchant
and the lender to absorb
their losses.
The production of cultivators and manufacturers filled
the holds of Mediterranean
merchant vessels. Manufacturers usually operated on a
small scale, but there are records of pottery workshops
with upward of sixty employees. One factory in fourthcentury Athens employed 120
slaves in the manufacture of
shields. Throughout the trading world of the Mediterranean basin, entrepreneurs established small businesses and
offered their wares in the
larger market.
Trade links between the
Greek cities and their colonies contributed to a sense of
a larger Greek community.
Colonists recognized the
same gods as their cousins in
the Greek peninsula. They
spoke Greek dialects, and they
maintained commercial relaHarvesting olives. In this painting on a vase, two men
tionships with their native
knock fruit off the branches while a third climbs the
communities. Greeks from
tree to shake the limbs, and another gathers olives from
all parts gathered periodically
the ground.
to participate in panhellenic
festivals that reinforced their
common bonds. Many of those festivals featured athletic, literary, or musical contests in
which individuals sought to win glory for their polis.
Best known of the panhellenic festivals were the Olympic Games. According to
tradition, in 776 B.C.E. Greek communities from all parts of the Mediterranean sent
their best athletes to the polis of Olympia to engage in contests of speed, strength,
and skill. Events included footracing, long jump, boxing, wrestling, javelin tossing,
and discus throwing. Winners of events received olive wreaths, and they became celebrated heroes in their home poleis. The ancient Olympic Games took place every four
years for more than a millennium before quietly disappearing from Greek life. So, although they were not united politically, by the sixth century B.C.E. Greek communities
had nevertheless established a sense of collective identity.
During the Hellenistic era, trade drew the Greeks into an even larger world of commerce and communication as colonists and traders expanded the range of their operations throughout Alexander’s empire and the realms that succeeded him. Caravan trade
linked Persia and Bactria to the western regions of the Hellenistic world. Dependent
on horses and donkeys, caravans could not transport heavy or bulky goods but, rather,
carried luxury products such as gems and jewelry, perfumes and aromatic oils. These

247

Panhellenic Festivals

The Olympic Games

ben06937.Ch10_230-257.qxd

248

PART II |

8/27/07

8:14 AM

Page 248

The Formation of Classical Societies, 500 B.C.E. to 500 C.E.

goods all had high value relative to weight so that merchants could feed themselves
and their animals, pay the high costs of overland transport, and still turn a profit. Traffic in bulkier goods traveled the sea lanes of the Mediterranean, the Red Sea, the Persian Gulf, and the Arabian Sea.

Family and Society

Patriarchal Society

Sappho

Slavery

Homer’s works portrayed a society composed of heroic warriors and their outspoken
wives. Strong-willed human beings clashed constantly with one another and sometimes even defied the gods in pursuing their interests. These aggressive and assertive
characters depended on less flamboyant individuals to provide them with food and
other necessities, but Homer had no interest in discussing the humdrum lives of farmers and their families.
With the establishment of poleis in the eighth century B.C.E., the nature of Greek
family and society came into clearer focus. Like urban societies in southwest Asia and
Anatolia, the Greek poleis adopted strictly patriarchal family structures. Male family
heads ruled their households, and fathers even had the right to decide whether to keep
infants born to their wives. They could not legally kill infants, but they could abandon
newborns in the mountains or the countryside where they would soon die of exposure
unless found and rescued by others.
Greek women fell under the authority of their fathers, husbands, or sons. Upperclass women living in poleis spent most of their time in the family home, and they
ventured outside in the company of servants or chaperones and often wore veils to
discourage the attention of men from other families. In most of the poleis, women
could not own landed property, but they sometimes operated small businesses such as
shops and food stalls. The only public position open to Greek women was that of
priestess of a religious cult. Sparta was something of a special case when it came to
gender relations: there women participated in athletic contests, went about town by
themselves, joined in public festivals, and sometimes even took up arms to defend the
polis. Even in Sparta, however, men were family authorities, and men alone determined state policies.
Literacy was common among upper-class Greek women, and a few women earned
reputations for literary talent. Most famous of them was the poet Sappho, who composed nine volumes of poetry around 600 B.C.E. Sappho, probably a widow from an
aristocratic family, invited young women into her home for instruction in music and
literature. Critics charged her with homosexual activity, and her surviving verse speaks
of her strong physical attraction to young women. Greek society readily tolerated sexual
relationships between men but frowned on female homosexuality. As a result, Sappho
fell under a moral cloud, and only fragments of her poetry survive.
Aristocratic families with extensive landholdings could afford to provide girls with
a formal education, but in less privileged families all hands contributed to the welfare
of the household. In rural families, men performed most of the outside work and
women took care of domestic chores and wove wool textiles. In artisan families living
in the poleis, both men and women often participated in businesses and maintained
stands or booths in the marketplace.
Throughout the Greek world, as in other classical societies, slavery was a prominent means of mobilizing labor. Slaves came from differing backgrounds. Some were
formerly free Greeks who entered slavery because they could not pay their debts.
Many came from the ranks of soldiers captured in war. A large number came from the
peoples with whom the Greeks traded: slave markets at Black Sea ports sold semi-

ben06937.Ch10_230-257.qxd

8/27/07

8:15 AM

Page 249

CHAPTER 10 |

Mediterranean Society: The Greek Phase

249

nomadic Scythians captured in Russia, and Egyptians provided
African slaves from Nubia and other southern regions.
Greek law regarded all slaves as the private chattel of their
owners, and the conditions of slaves’ lives depended on the
needs and the temperament of their owner. Physically powerful slaves with no special skills most often provided heavy labor
in mines or on the estates of large landholders. Other unskilled
slaves worked at lighter tasks as domestic servants or caretakers of their owners’ children. Educated slaves and those skilled
at some craft or trade had special opportunities. Their owners
often regarded them as economic investments, provided them
with shops, and allowed them to keep a portion of their earnings as an incentive and a reward for efficient work.
In some cases, slaves with entrepreneurial talent succeeded
well enough in their businesses to win their freedom. A slave
named Pasion, for example, worked first as a porter and then as
a clerk at a prominent Athenian bank during the late fifth and
early fourth centuries B.C.E. Pasion developed into a shrewd
businessman who worked efficiently and turned considerable
profits for his masters, who in turn entrusted him with greater
responsibilities and rewarded him for successful efforts. Ultimately, Pasion gained his freedom, took over management of
the bank, outfitted five warships from his own pocket, and won
a grant of Athenian citizenship.

The Cultural Life
of Classical Greece
A slave carrying a lantern guides his drunken
During the eighth and seventh centuries B.C.E., as Greek mermaster home following a party.
chants ventured throughout the Mediterranean basin, they became acquainted with the sophisticated cultural traditions of
Mesopotamia and Egypt. They learned astronomy, science, mathematics, medicine,
and magic from the Babylonians as well as geometry, medicine, and divination from
the Egyptians. They also drew inspiration from the myths, religious beliefs, art motifs,
and architectural styles of Mesopotamia and Egypt. About 800 B.C.E. they adapted
the Phoenician alphabet to their language: to the Phoenicians’ consonants they added
symbols for vowels and thus created an exceptionally flexible system for representing
speech in written form.
During the fifth and fourth centuries B.C.E., the Greeks combined those borrowed
cultural elements with their own intellectual interests to elaborate a rich cultural tradition. The most distinctive feature of classical Greek culture was the effort to construct
a consistent system of philosophy based purely on reason. Greek cultural figures also
exercised enormous influence over art, literature, and moral thought in the Mediterranean basin and western Europe.

Rational Thought and Philosophy
The pivotal figure in the development of philosophy was Socrates (470–399 B.C.E.),
a thoughtful and reflective Athenian driven by a powerful urge to understand human

Socrates

ben06937.Ch10_230-257.qxd

250

Plato

PART II |

8/27/07

8:15 AM

Page 250

The Formation of Classical Societies, 500 B.C.E. to 500 C.E.

beings and human affairs in all their complexity. During his youth Socrates studied
the ideas of Greek scientists who pursued
the interests of their Mesopotamian and
Egyptian predecessors. Gradually, however, he became disenchanted with their
efforts to understand the natural world,
which he regarded as less important than
human affairs.
Socrates did not commit his thought to
writing, but his disciple Plato later composed dialogues that represented Socrates’
views. Nor did Socrates expound his views
assertively: rather, he posed questions that
encouraged reflection on human issues,
particularly on matters of ethics and morality. He suggested that human beings could
lead honest lives and that honor was far
more important than wealth, fame, or other
superficial attributes. He scorned those who
preferred public accolades to personal integrity, and he insisted on the need to reflect on the purposes and goals of life. “The
unexamined life is not worth living,” he
held, implying that human beings had an
obligation to strive for personal integrity,
Tradition holds that Socrates was not a
behave honorably toward others, and work
physically attractive man, but this statue
toward the construction of a just society.
emphasizes his sincerity and simplicity.
In elaborating those views, Socrates
often played the role of a gadfly who subjected traditional ethical teachings to critical
scrutiny. This tactic outraged some of his fellow citizens, who brought him to trial
on charges that he encouraged immorality and corrupted the Athenian youths who
joined him in the marketplace to discuss moral and ethical issues. A jury of Athenian
citizens decided that Socrates had indeed passed the bounds of propriety and condemned him to death. In 399 B.C.E. Socrates drank a potion of hemlock sap and died
in the company of his friends.
Socrates’ influence survived in the work of his most zealous disciple, Plato
(430–347 B.C.E.), and in Plato’s disciple Aristotle (384–322 B.C.E.). Inspired by his
mentor’s reflections, Plato elaborated a systematic philosophy of great subtlety. He
presented his thought in a series of dialogues in which Socrates figured as the principal speaker. In the earliest dialogues, written shortly after Socrates’ death, Plato largely
represented his mentor’s views. As time passed, Plato gradually formulated his thought
into a systematic vision of the world and human society.
The cornerstone of Plato’s thought was his theory of Forms or Ideas. It disturbed
Plato that he could not gain satisfactory intellectual control over the world. The quality of virtue, for example, meant different things in different situations, as did honesty,
courage, truth, and beauty. Generally speaking, for example, virtue required individuals to honor and obey their parents. But if a parent engaged in illegal behavior, virtue
required offspring to denounce the offense and seek punishment. How was it possible,
then, to understand virtue as an abstract quality? In seeking an answer to that question, Plato developed his belief that the world in which we live was not the only

ben06937.Ch10_230-257.qxd

8/27/07

8:15 AM

Page 251

CHAPTER 10 |

Mediterranean Society: The Greek Phase

251

Sources from the Past
Socrates’ View of Death
In one of his earliest dialogues, the Apology, Plato offered an account of Socrates’ defense of himself during his trial
before a jury of Athenian citizens. After the jury had convicted him and condemned him to death, Socrates reflected on
the nature of death and reemphasized his commitment to virtue rather than to wealth or fame.
And if we reflect in another way we shall see that we may
well hope that death is a good thing. For the state of
death is one of two things: either the dead man wholly
ceases to be and loses all sensation; or, according to the
common belief, it is a change and a migration of the soul
unto another place. And if death is the absence of all sensation, like the sleep of one whose slumbers are unbroken by any dreams, it will be a wonderful gain. For if a
man had to select that night in which he slept so soundly
that he did not even see any dreams, and had to compare with it all the other nights and days of his life, and
then had to say how many days and nights in his life he
had slept better and more pleasantly than this night, I
think that a private person, nay, even the great king of
Persia himself, would find them easy to count, compared
with the others. If that is the nature of death, I for one
count it a gain. For then it appears that eternity is nothing more than a single night.
But if death is a journey to another place, and the
common belief be true, that all who have died dwell
there, what good could be greater than this, my judges?
Would a journey not be worth taking if at the end of it,
in the other world, we should be released from the selfstyled judges of this world, and should find the true
judges who are said to sit in judgment below? . . . It
would be an infinite happiness to converse with them,
and to live with them, and to examine them. Assuredly
there they do not put men to death for doing that. For
besides the other ways in which they are happier than
we are, they are immortal, at least if the common belief
be true.

And you too, judges, must face death with a good
courage, and believe this as a truth, that no evil can happen to a good man, either in life, or after death. His fortunes are not neglected by the gods, and what has come
to me today has not come by chance. I am persuaded
that it is better for me to die now, and to be released
from trouble. . . . And so I am hardly angry with my accusers, or with those who have condemned me to die.
Yet it was not with this mind that they accused me and
condemned me, but rather they meant to do me an injury. Only to that extent do I find fault with them.
Yet I have one request to make of them. When my
sons grow up, visit them with punishment, my friends,
and vex them in the same way that I have vexed you if
they seem to you to care for riches or for anything other
than virtue: and if they think that they are something
when they are nothing at all, reproach them as I have
reproached you for not caring for what they should and
for thinking that they are great men when in fact they
are worthless. And if you will do this, I myself and my
sons will have received our deserts at your hands.
But now the time has come, and we must go
hence: I to die, and you to live. Whether life or death
is better is known to God, and to God only.
FOR FURTHER REFLECTION

How does Socrates’ understanding of personal morality
and its rewards compare and contrast with the Zoroastrian, Buddhist, and Hindu views discussed in earlier
chapters?

SOURCE: F. J. Church, trans. The Trial and Death of Socrates, 2nd ed. London: Macmillan, 1886, pp. 76–78.
(Translation slightly modified.)

world—indeed, it was not the world of genuine reality, but only a pale and imperfect
reflection of the world of Forms or Ideas. Displays of virtue or other qualities in the
world imperfectly reflected the ideal qualities. Only by entering the world of Forms or
Ideas was it possible to understand the true nature of virtue and other qualities. The
secrets of that world were available only to philosophers—those who applied their rational faculties to the pursuit of wisdom.

ben06937.Ch10_230-257.qxd

252

PART II |

8/27/07

8:15 AM

Page 252

The Formation of Classical Societies, 500 B.C.E. to 500 C.E.

A mosaic from the Italian town of
Pompeii, near Naples, depicts Plato
(standing at left) discussing philosophical
issues with students. Produced in the
early first century C.E., this illustration
testifies to the popularity of Greek
philosophy in classical Roman society.

Aristotle

Though abstract, Plato’s thought had important political and social implications.
In his dialogue Republic, for example, Plato sketched an ideal state that reflected his
philosophical views. Because philosophers were in the best position to understand ultimate reality, and hence to design policies in accordance with the Form or Idea of
justice, he held that the best state was one where either philosophers ruled as kings or
kings were themselves philosophers. In effect, then, Plato advocated an intellectual
aristocracy: the philosophical elite would rule, and other, less intelligent, classes would
work at functions for which their talents best suited them.
During the generation after Plato, Aristotle elaborated a systematic philosophy
that equaled Plato’s work in its long-term influence. Though originally a disciple of
Plato, Aristotle came to distrust the theory of Forms or Ideas, which he considered
artificial intellectual constructs unnecessary for understanding the world. Unlike Plato,
Aristotle believed that philosophers could rely on their senses to provide accurate information about the world and then depend on reason to sort out its mysteries. Like
Plato, Aristotle explored the nature of reality in subtle metaphysical works, and he devised rigorous rules of logic in an effort to construct powerful and compelling arguments. But he also wrote on biology, physics, astronomy, psychology, politics, ethics,
and literature. His work provided such a coherent and comprehensive vision of the
world that his later disciples, the Christian scholastic philosophers of medieval Europe, called him “the master of those who know.”
The Greek philosophers deeply influenced the development of European and Islamic cultural traditions. Until the seventeenth century C.E., most European philosophers regarded the Greeks as intellectual authorities. Christian and Islamic theologians
alike went to great lengths to harmonize their religious convictions with the philosophical views of Plato and Aristotle. Thus, like philosophical and religious figures in

ben06937.Ch10_230-257.qxd

8/27/07

8:15 AM

Page 253

CHAPTER 10 |

Mediterranean Society: The Greek Phase

253

other classical societies, Plato and Aristotle provided a powerful intellectual framework
that shaped thought about the world and human affairs for two millennia and more.

Popular Religion and Greek Drama
Because most Greeks of the classical era did not have an advanced education and did
not chat regularly with the philosophers, they did not rely on systems of formal logic
when seeking to understand their place in the larger world. Instead, they turned to
traditions of popular culture and popular religion that shed light on human nature
and offered guidance for human behavior.
The Greeks did not recognize a single, exclusive, all-powerful god. Their IndoEuropean ancestors had attributed supernatural powers to natural elements such as
sun, wind, and rain. Over the course of the centuries, the Greeks personified these
powers and came to think of them as gods. They constructed myths that related the
stories of the gods, their relations with one another, and their roles in bringing the
world to its present state.
In the beginning, they believed, there was the formless void of chaos out of which
emerged the earth, the mother and creator of all things. The earth then generated
the sky, and together they produced night, day, sun, moon, and other natural phenomena. Struggles between the deities led to bitter heavenly battles, and ultimately
Zeus, grandson of the earth and sky gods, emerged as paramount ruler of the divine
realm. Zeus’s heavenly court included scores of subordinate deities who had various
responsibilities: the god Apollo promoted wisdom and justice, for example; the goddess Fortune brought unexpected opportunities and difficulties; and the Furies
wreaked vengeance on those who violated divine law.
Like religious traditions in other lands, Greek myths sought to explain the world
and the forces that shape it. They served also as foundations for religious cults that
contributed to a powerful sense of community in classical Greece. Many of the cults
conducted ritual observances that were open only to initiates. One especially popular
cult known as the Eleusinian mysteries, for example, sponsored a ritual community
meal and encouraged initiates to observe high moral standards.
Some cults admitted only women. Because women could not participate in legal
and political life, the cults provided opportunities for them to play roles in society
outside the home. The fertility cult of Demeter, goddess of grain, excluded men. In
honor of Demeter women gathered on a hill for three days, offered sacrifices to the
goddess, and took part in a celebratory feast. This event occurred in October or November before the planting of grain and sought to ensure bountiful harvests.
Women were also the most prominent devotees of Dionysus, the god of wine,
also known as Bacchus, although men sometimes joined in his celebration. During
the spring of the year, when the vines produced their fruit, devotees retreated into
the hills to celebrate Dionysus with song and dance. The dramatist Euripides offered
an account of one such Dionysian season in his play The Bacchae. Euripides described
the preparations for the festival and the celebrants’ joyful march to the mountains.
Spirited music and dance brought the devotees to such a state of frenzy that they fell
on a sacrificial goat—and also a man hiding in the brush in an unwise effort to observe the proceedings—ripped the victims apart, and presented them as offerings to
Dionysus. Though he was a skeptic who regarded much of Greek religion as sham
and hypocrisy, Euripides nonetheless recognized that powerful emotional bonds held
together the Dionysian community.
During the fifth century B.C.E., as the poleis strengthened their grip on public
and political life, the religious cults became progressively more tame. The cult of

Greek Deities

Religious Cults

The Cult of Dionysus

ben06937.Ch10_230-257.qxd

254

PART II |

8/27/07

8:15 AM

Page 254

The Formation of Classical Societies, 500 B.C.E. to 500 C.E.

Tragic Drama

Dionysus, originally one of the most unrestrained, became one of the most thoroughly domesticated. The venue of the rituals shifted from the mountains to the
polis, and the nature of the observances changed dramatically. Instead of emotional
festivals, the Dionysian season saw the presentation of plays that honored the traditions of the polis, examined relations between human beings and the gods, or reflected on problems of ethics and morality.
This transformation of Dionysus’s cult set the stage for the emergence of Greek
dramatic literature as dramatists composed plays for presentation at annual theatrical
festivals. Of the thousands of plays written in classical Greece, only a few survive: thirtytwo tragedies and a dozen comedies have come down to the present in substantially
complete form. Yet this small sample shows that the dramatists engaged audiences in
subtle reflection on complicated themes. The great tragedians—Aeschylus, Sophocles,
and Euripides—whose lives spanned the fifth century B.C.E., explored the possibilities
and limitations of human action. To what extent could human beings act as responsible agents in society? What was their proper role when they confronted the limits that
the gods or other humans placed on their activity? How should they proceed when the
gods and human authorities presented them with conflicting demands?
Comic dramatists such as Aristophanes also dealt with serious issues of human
striving and responsible behavior. They took savage delight in lampooning the public
and political figures of their time. The comedians aimed to influence popular attitudes by ridiculing the foibles of prominent public figures and calling attention to
the absurd consequences of ill-considered action.

Hellenistic Philosophy and Religion

The Hellenistic
Philosophers

Religions of Salvation

As the Hellenistic empires seized the political initiative in the Mediterranean basin
and eclipsed the poleis, Greek philosophy and religion lost their civic character. Because the poleis no longer controlled their destinies but, rather, figured as small elements in a large administrative machine, residents ceased to regard their polis as the
focus of individual loyalties. Instead, they inclined toward cultural and religious alternatives that ministered to the needs and interests of individuals living in a large,
cosmopolitan society.
The most popular Hellenistic philosophers—the Epicureans, the Skeptics, and
the Stoics—addressed individual needs by searching for personal tranquility and
serenity. Epicureans, for example, identified pleasure as the greatest good. By pleasure they did not mean unbridled hedonism but, rather, a state of quiet satisfaction
that would shield them from the pressures of the Hellenistic world. Skeptics refused
to take strong positions on political, moral, and social issues because they doubted
the possibility of certain knowledge. Rather than engage in fruitless disputes, they
sought equanimity and left contentious issues to others.
The most respected and influential of the Hellenistic philosophers were the Stoics,
who considered all human beings members of a universal family. Unlike the Epicureans
and the Skeptics, the Stoics did not seek to withdraw from the pressures of the world.
Rather, they taught that individuals had the duty to aid others and lead virtuous lives.
The Stoics believed that individuals could avoid anxieties caused by the pressures of
Hellenistic society by concentrating their attention strictly on the duties that reason
and nature demanded of them. Thus, like the Epicureans and the Skeptics, the Stoics
sought ways to bring individuals to a state of inner peace and tranquility.
Although the philosophers’ doctrines appealed to educated elites, religions of salvation enjoyed surging popularity in Hellenistic society. Mystery religions promised
eternal bliss for initiates who observed their rites and lived in accordance with their

ben06937.Ch10_230-257.qxd

8/27/07

8:15 AM

Page 255

CHAPTER 10 |

Mediterranean Society: The Greek Phase

doctrines. Some faiths spread across the trade routes and found followers far from
their homelands. The Egyptian cult of Osiris, for example, became extraordinarily
popular because it promised salvation for those who led honorable lives. Cults from
Persia, Mesopotamia, Anatolia, and Greece also attracted disciples throughout the
Hellenistic world.
Many of the mystery religions involved the worship of a savior whose death and
resurrection would lead the way to eternal salvation for devoted followers. Some
philosophers and religious thinkers speculated that a single god might rule the entire
universe—just as Alexander and his successors governed enormous empires on
earth—and that this god had a plan for the salvation of all humankind. Like the Hellenistic philosophies, then, religions of salvation addressed the interests of individuals
searching for security in a complex world.

G

reek travelers linked the regions of the Mediterranean basin in classical times. Although they did not build a centralized empire, the Greeks dotted the Mediterranean

and Black Sea shorelines with their colonies, and their merchant fleets stimulated both
commercial and cultural interactions between peoples of distant lands. Greek merchants,
soldiers, and administrators also played prominent roles in the vast empires of Alexander
and the Hellenistic rulers. Quite apart from their political and economic significance, the
Greeks also left a remarkably rich cultural legacy. Greek philosophy, literature, and science profoundly influenced the intellectual and cultural development of peoples from
southwest Asia to western Europe. The Greek poleis and the Hellenistic cities provided
nurturing environments for rational thought and academic pursuits, and the frequent
travels of the Greeks promoted the spread of popular religious faiths throughout the
Mediterranean basin and beyond. Like classical Persia, China, and India, the Mediterranean basin became an integrated world.

255

ben06937.Ch10_230-257.qxd

256

PART II |

8/27/07

8:15 AM

Page 256

The Formation of Classical Societies, 500 B.C.E. to 500 C.E.

C H R O N O L O G Y
2200–1100 B.C.E.

Minoan society

1600–1100 B.C.E.

Mycenaean society

800–338 B.C.E.

Era of the classical Greek polis

ca. 600 B.C.E.

Life of Sappho

500–479 B.C.E.

Persian Wars

490 B.C.E.

Darius’s invasion of Greece

490 B.C.E.

Battle of Marathon

480 B.C.E.

Xerxes’ invasion of Greece

480 B.C.E.

Battle of Salamis

479 B.C.E.

Battle of Plataea

470–399 B.C.E.

Life of Socrates

443–429 B.C.E.

Pericles’ leadership in Athens

431–404 B.C.E.

Peloponnesian War

430–347 B.C.E.

Life of Plato

384 –322 B.C.E.

Life of Aristotle

359–336 B.C.E.

Reign of Philip II of Macedon

336–323 B.C.E.

Reign of Alexander of Macedon

F O R

F U R T H E R

R E A D I N G

Martin Bernal. Black Athena: The Afroasiatic Roots of Classical Civilization. 3 vols. New Brunswick, 1987–. Provocative and controversial study arguing for Egyptian and Semitic influences
on early Greek society.
Sue Blundell. Women in Ancient Greece. Cambridge, Mass., 1995.
A comprehensive survey of women and their roles in ancient
Greek society.
Walter Burkert. Babylon, Memphis, Persepolis: Eastern Contexts of
Greek Culture. Cambridge, Mass., 2004. Explores Mesopotamian, Egyptian, and Persian influences on Greek literature,
philosophy, and science.
———. The Orientalizing Revolution: Near Eastern Influence on
Greek Culture in the Early Archaic Age. Trans. by M. E. Pinder
and W. Burkert. Cambridge, Mass., 1992. An important scholarly work tracing Mesopotamian influence in early Greece.
Lionel Casson. The Ancient Mariners: Seafarers and Sea Fighters
of the Mediterranean in Ancient Times. 2nd ed. Princeton,

1991. Draws heavily on discoveries of underwater archaeologists in reconstructing the maritime history of the ancient
Mediterranean.
F. M. Cornford. Before and After Socrates. Cambridge, 1965. A
short but brilliant synthesis of classical Greek philosophy.
C. R. Dodds. The Greeks and the Irrational. Berkeley, 1968. An
influential study of Greek religion in light of modern psychological and anthropological theories.
Kenneth Dover. The Greeks. Austin, 1980. An engaging personal
interpretation of classical Greece.
M. I. Finley. Ancient Slavery and Modern Ideology. Expanded ed.
Princeton, 1998. Presents a thoughtful analysis of Greek and
Roman slavery in light of modern slavery and contemporary
debates.
Frank J. Frost. Greek Society. 2nd ed. Lexington, 1980. Concentrates on economic and social history from Mycenaean to
Hellenistic times.

ben06937.Ch10_230-257.qxd

8/27/07

8:15 AM

Page 257

CHAPTER 10 |

Frederick C. Grant, ed. Hellenistic Religions: The Age of Syncretism. Indianapolis, 1953. Fascinating collection of translated documents and texts that throw light on religious and
philosophical beliefs of the Hellenistic era.
N. G. L. Hammond. The Genius of Alexander the Great. Chapel
Hill, 1997. The best recent work on Alexander of Macedon.
W. V. Harris, ed. Rethinking the Mediterranean. New York,
2005. A collection of scholarly essays exploring issues that
linked the various lands bordering the Mediterranean in premodern times.
Donald Kagan. The Peloponnesian War. New York, 2003. Synopsis of the debilitating conflict by the foremost contemporary
scholar of the Peloponnesian War.
William H. McNeill and Jean W. Sedlar, eds. The Classical
Mediterranean World. New York, 1969. Primary sources

Mediterranean Society: The Greek Phase

257

from classical Greece and the Hellenistic world in English
translation.
Sarah B. Pomeroy. Goddesses, Whores, Wives, and Slaves: Women
in Classical Antiquity. New York, 1995. Outstanding study
analyzing the status and role of women in classical Greece
and Rome.
Susan Sherwin-White and Amélie Kuhrt. From Samarkhand to
Sardis: A New Approach to the Seleucid Empire. Berkeley,
1993. Detailed scholarly analysis of the Seleucid empire concentrating on political and economic matters.
Mortimer Wheeler. Flames over Persepolis. New York, 1968. Examines the influence of Hellenistic artists in Persia, Bactria,
and India.


